To access the designed triangular or rectangular macrocyclic precursors, we utilized palladiumcatalysed C–B/C–Br cross-coupling (Suzuki–Miyaura coupling) and/or nickel-mediated C–Br/C–Br coupling.
We also established step-economical routes to [14] and [16]CPP using nickel-mediated C–Br/ C–Br coupling.
The final aromatization steps toward CPPs were accomplished with NaHSO4.
Thus, combined with our previous size-selective synthesis of [12] and [14]–[16]CPP, we completed our sizeselective synthesis of [9]–[16]CPP.
The successful size-selective syntheses of [n]CPPs speak well for the flexibility and reliability of our strategy using a cyclohexane ring.
Cycloparaphenylene (CPP) and related carbon nanorings have attracted considerable attentions because of their beautiful structures and unique -conjugation system (Fig.1).
In addition, as CPP represents a shortest sidewall segment of armchair single-walled carbon nanotubes, there are great expectations that CPP would serve as a template or seed in the synthesis of size-selective synthetic methods are limited to [6]–[8], [12], and [14]–[16]CPP.
The establishment of size-selective synthesis of all [n]CPPs is clearly needed for future applications of CPP for various purposes.
Herein we report the size-selective synthesis of the ‘‘remaining’’ CPPs, [9]–[11] and [13]CPP, by strategically using our cyclohexane-based L-shaped unit.
available. With a variety of synthetic routes in hand, unique cyclic and curved conjugation, photophysical properties, and guest-encapsulating properties of CPPs have been uncovered.
Theoretical studies also predicted interesting struc- structurally uniform armchair carbon nanotubes.
After many years of trials by chemists, the successful synthesis of CPPs has been recently accomplished by the groups of Bertozzi, Itami, Yamago, and Jasti.
Very recently [12]CPP, prepared by the procedure developed in our group, has become commercially tural and electronic properties of CPPs.
Recently, we also reported the synthesis and properties of [9]cyclo-1,4-naphthylene, a p -extended CPP, for the first time.
More recently, we synthesized cycloparaphenylene-2,5-pyridylidene, the first heteroatom-containing CPP.
Moreover, related to these studies, we and Isobe reported the design and synthesis of short sidewall segments of chiral carbon nanotubes; acene-inserted CPP and cyclochrysene.
Despite these significant advances, however, there still exists the need for new methods in CPP synthesis.
For example, Our previous synthetic routes to [n]CPPs (n ¼ 9, 12, 14–16) are summarized in Fig.2. We utilized cis-1,4-diphenylcyclohexane1,4-diyl as the key terphenyl-convertible L-shaped unit.
In 2009, we reported the first selective synthesis of [12]CPP (Fig.2, eqn (1)).
Four L-shaped units were connected stepwise by Pd-catalysed Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling to form rectangular-shaped cyclic tetramer.
We then simplified the macrocyclization method to a nickel-mediated ‘‘shotgun’’ macrocyclization of L-shaped dihalides, which led to the concise synthesis of [12]CPP as well as [9]CPP (Fig.2, eqn (2)).
Although the L-shaped unit was initially designed for rectangular-shaped tetramer, we became aware that the L-shaped unit is also suitable for the formation of triangular macrocycles.
In modular synthesis of [14]–[16]CPP, two U-shaped units were connected by Pd-catalysed cross-coupling (Fig.2, eqn (3)).
Because of the flexibility of the cyclohexane rings, the coupling between two different sizes of U-shaped units (7 + 8) also occurred nicely to afford the corresponding macrocyclic compound, which was transformed into [15]CPP, an odd-numbered CPP, in a size-selective fashion.
In the size-selective synthesis of [9]–[11] and [13]CPP, we designed the corresponding macrocyclic precursors.
As for the unit-assembling reactions leading to a target macrocycle precursor, we utilized palladium-catalysed C–B/C–Br crosscoupling (Suzuki–Miyaura coupling) and/or nickel-mediated C–Br/C–Br coupling.
Outline of size-selective synthesis of [9]–[11] and [13]CPP Our retrosynthesis of [9]–[11] and [13]CPP is outlined in Fig.3. Triangular and rectangular macrocycles A–D containing three or four cis-cyclohexane-1,4-diyl units (L-shaped units) were thought to be possible macrocyclic precursors leading to [9]–[11] and [13]CPP, respectively.
For the synthesis of macrocycles A–D, it was necessary to assemble a diphenylcyclohexane unit and a 1,4-phenylene unit in a [(3 3) + (1 0)], [(3 3) + (1 1)], [(3 3) + (1 2)], or [(3 4) + (1 1)] mode, respectively (Fig.3).
Fig. 4 shows the optimized structures of simplified models of these macrocycles AH–DH (X ¼ H) calculated by Gaussian09 program with B3LYP/6-31(G) level of theory.
Optimized structures of BH and CH were selected from each four conformers (see ESI† for details).
In order to estimate the viability of the formation of macrocycles A–D, the strain energies of AH–DH (X ¼ H) were also calculated using the hypothetical homodesmotic reaction of a CPP and biphenyl forming cis-1,4-diphenylcyclohexane and p-terphenyl (see ESI† for details).
These values as well as the strained energies of corresponding CPP are listed in Table 1.
Two reference molecules, E and F, which correspond to triangular precursor for [12]CPP and rectangular one for [16] CPP, respectively, were also calculated.
As can be seen in Table 1, triangular macrocycles have slightly higher strain energies than rectangular ones.
Because both the strain energies of BH–DH and the difference of strain energies between BH–DH and corresponding CPPs were lower than those in the case of [9]CPP, which was already synthesized by our L-shaped strategy, we concluded that the designed macrocycles B–D should be suitable precursors for [10], [11] and [13]CPP.
Fig. 5 shows schematic routes to macrocyclic precursors of [9]–[11] and [13]CPP reported in this paper.
Palladium-catalysed Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction is the key reaction to assemble building blocks to form macrocycles.
In all crosscoupling reactions, an excess amount of one component was used over the other for the formation of desired acyclic compounds selectively.
For example, 2 : 1 cross-coupling reaction of two kinds of L-shaped units produced acyclic trimer in a [3 + 3 + 3] fashion, and cross-coupling of L-shaped unit and linear unit resulted in the formation of [3 + 1 + 3] or [1 + 3 + 1] product selectively.
Macrocyclization was performed by using nickelmediated intramolecular C–Br/C–Br coupling for the precursors of [9], [11] and [13]CPP, or by the Suzuki–Miyaura crosscoupling for the precursor of [10]CPP.
Size-selective synthesis of [9]CPP First we attempted the size-selective synthesis of [9]CPP (Scheme 1).
The L-shaped dibromide 1 was synthesized in two steps from commercially available 1,4-dibromobenzene and cyclohexane-1,4-dione by our previously reported method in 81% overall yield.
Then, 1 was converted to the corresponding L-shaped diboronate 2 in 95% yield by palladium-catalysed Miyaura borylation.
The 2 : 1 cross-coupling of 1 and 2 could be affected by the action of Pd(PPh3)4/Ag2CO3 to produce acyclic C-shaped trimer 3 in 65% yield with 90% recovery of unreacted 1 that was employed in an excess amount.
The macrocyclization of C-shaped dibromide 3 was successfully accomplished under the influence of bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene)nickel (Ni(cod)2) and 2,2 0 bipyridyl (bpy) in refluxing THF to afford the target cyclic trimer 4 in 46% yield.
Although we previously synthesized this triangular macrocycle 4 by the nickel-mediated ‘‘shotgun’’ macrocyclization of 1, this was achieved with the co-production of cyclic tetramer.
The present stepwise method allows us to selectively synthesize the triangular macrocycle 4, which has a benefit in the purification process.
Following our previously reported aromatization of 4 with NaHSO4 under air, the sizeselective synthesis of [9]CPP was achieved.
Size-selective synthesis of [10]CPP The size-selective synthesis of [10]CPP can be achieved by using the acyclic C-shaped dibromide 3, which we utilized in the synthesis of [9]CPP.
Thus, the [9 + 1]-type cross-coupling of 3 and 1,4-diborylbenzene 5 occurred under the influence of Pd(OAc)2/XPhos/NaOH to furnish the triangular macrocycle 6 in 18% yield (Scheme 2).
A slight excess amount (1.4 equiv. ) of 5 over 3 was used in the reaction because deborylation was observed as a side reaction.
Single crystals of 6 were obtained by recrystallization from benzene–pentane at room temperature.
Two benzene molecules are co-crystallized with 6.
The ORTEP drawing of 6 2C6H6 is shown in Fig.6. The central cavity of macrocycle 6 is filled by methoxymethyl groups of another macrocycle in the solid state (see ESI† for details).
Conformations of cyclohexane rings in 6 were found to be identical to those in the optimized structure BH (Fig.4).
We also attempted the [7 + 3]-type cross-coupling of a 7benzene U-shaped unit and 3-benzene L-shaped unit for accessing the triangular macrocycle 6, but the efficiency of macrocyclization was almost the same (20% yield, see ESI† for details).
Nevertheless, the macrocycle 6 was successfully aromatized by NaHSO4 to form [10]CPP in 24% yield.
Size-selective synthesis of [11]CPP The size-selective synthesis of [11]CPP was achieved by a [3 + 5 + 3] route shown in Scheme 3.
For this particular CPP, we identified that the use of large 5-benzene L-shaped unit 7 is effective.
Thus, the L-shaped diboronate 7 was synthesized in 54% yield by the 2 : 1 cross-coupling of linear unit 5 and 3-benzene L-shaped unit 1 under the influence of Pd(PPh3)4/Ag2CO3.
Then, the 5benzene L-shaped diboronate 7 was treated with an excess amount of 1 in the presence of catalytic Pd(PPh3)4 and Na2CO3 in toluene–EtOAc at 70 C to form the acyclic C-shaped compound 8 in a [3 + 5 + 3] manner (44% yield).
The Ni(cod)2/ bpy-promoted intramolecular C–Br/C–Br coupling of 8 then resulted in the formation of triangular macrocycle 9 in 42% yield.
The aromatization of 9 was achieved with NaHSO4 and o-chloranil as an oxidant to selectively produce [11]CPP in 32% yield.
Size-selective synthesis of [13]CPP In the size-selective synthesis of [13]CPP, we decided to take a route via rectangular-shaped macrocycle (Scheme 4).
Thus, the requisite 7-ring U-shaped diboronate 10 was first prepared according to our previous method in two steps from 1 and 5.
Thereafter, 10 was cross-coupled with 1 in a [3 + 7 + 3] mode (1 : 2 cross-coupling) under the influence of Pd(PPh3)4/Ag2CO3 to furnish acyclic dibromide 11 in 58% yield.
The target rectangular macrocycle 12 was formed in 51% yield by Ni(cod)2/bpypromoted intramolecular C–Br/C–Br coupling.
The precursor 12 was then subjected to aromatization reaction with NaHSO4 and o-chloranil to afford [13]CPP in 60% yield.
Alternative size-selective synthesis of [14] and [16]CPP Though we already reported a selective synthesis of [14] and [16] CPP via palladium-catalyzed stepwise cross-coupling, we established alternative, step-economical routes using nickelmediated C–Br/C–Br coupling (Scheme 5).
Thus, the 7- and 8ring U-shaped dibromides (13 and 15), which can be prepared from L-shaped dibromide 1 in one step, were treated with Ni(cod)2/bpy in refluxing THF to yield the corresponding rectangular-shaped macrocycles 14 and 16 in 40 and 31% yield, respectively.
Following our previously reported aromatization of 14 and 16 with NaHSO4 under air, the size-selective synthesis of [14] and [16]CPP was accomplished.
In summary, we have achieved the first size-selective synthesis of [9]–[11] and [13]CPP by strategically utilizing cis-1,4-diphenylcyclohexane-1,4-diyl as the key terphenyl-convertible L-shaped unit.
To access the designed triangular or rectangular macrocyclic precursors, we utilized palladium-catalysed C–B/C– Br cross-coupling (Suzuki–Miyaura coupling) and/or nickelmediated C–Br/C–Br coupling.
We also established stepeconomical routes to [14] and [16]CPP using nickel-mediated C–Br/C–Br coupling.
The final aromatization steps toward CPPs were accomplished with NaHSO4.
Thus, combined with our previous synthesis of [12] and [14]–[16]CPP, we completed our size-selective synthesis of [9]–[16]CPP (Scheme 6).
The successful size-selective syntheses of [n]CPPs speak well for the flexibility and reliability of our strategy using a cyclohexane ring.
Furthermore, combined with the size-selective synthetic methods for [6]CPP (Jasti), [7]CPP (Jasti), and [8]CPP (Yamago), we are now in a position to explore the ring-size effects of CPP in various directions.
We thank Prof. Kazuyuki Tatsumi for the use of an X-ray diffractometer.
This work was supported by the Funding Program for Next Generation World-Leading Researchers from JSPS (220GR049 to K.
I.). H. O. is a recipient of JSPS research fellowship for young scientists.
Calculations were performed using the resources of the Research Center for Computational Science, Okazaki, Japan.
The formation of aryl – aryl bonds is a useful synthetic reaction, considering the fact that biaryl derivatives are important synthetic targets, such as natural products, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and conjugated materials.
The most commonly used method for aryl aryl bond formation involves the transition metal-catalyzed cross coupling of aryl halides with aryl metal reagents, especially organoboron reagents, a reaction that is referred to as Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling.
The direct introduction of aryl groups in conjunction with the cleavage of C – H bonds has been extensively studied as an alternative strategy for the construction of biaryl derivatives.
While a variety of transition metal complexes can be used in the arylation of C – H bonds, palladium or nickel catalysts are the most reliable species.
Oi et al. reported the  rst example of the Ru( )catalyzed arylation of C – H bonds, in which 2-phenylpyridine derivatives reacted with aryl bromides to result in arylation at the ortho position.
Later, Ackermann, Dixneuf, Bruneau, and others made some signi  cant contributions to this  eld.
Various nitrogen-containing directing groups such as Nheterocycles and imines are applicable to the Ru( )-catalyzed arylation reactions.
However, the Ru( )-catalyzed arylation of C – H bonds still remains at an early stage compared with the extensively studied Pd-catalyzed C – H bond arylation reactions.
Expanding the scope to include other types of substrates continues to remain a critical challenge.
Furthermore, the reaction mechanism for Ru( )-catalyzed arylation has not been elucidated and even the electronic effects of substituents on the e ffi ciency of the reactions have not been examined in detail.
Chelation-assisted transformation is now one of the viable methods for transforming ortho C – H bonds.
A wide variety of directing groups has been evaluated to date, but in most cases, structurally simple monodentate directing groups have been used.
If a bidentate directing group could be used in the transformation of C – H bonds, it would open new avenues for applications and for the development of new reactions, which cannot currently be achieved using the conventional simple directing groups.
The use of 8-aminoquinoline or picolinamides as an N,N-bidentate directing group was reported in a pioneering study by Daugulis et al. who discovered the Pd( )catalyzed arylation of C – H bonds.
Since this pioneering example appeared in the literature, a number of reactions utilizing an N,N-bidentate directing-assisted transformation of C – H bonds have been developed, especially in the case of Pd( )catalyzed reactions.
In sharp contrast, bidentate directing systems of other transition metal-catalyzed transformations of C – H bonds are quite rare.
We recently reported the Ru(0)-catalyzed C – H bond carbonylation of aromatic and aliphatic amides with a 2-pyridinylmethylamine moiety as the bidentate directing group and the Ni(0)-catalyzed oxidative annulation of aromatic amides with alkynes leading to isoquinolones.
We wish to report on the Ru( )-catalyzed ortho-arylation of aromatic amides with a bidentate directing group and some interesting electronic effects on the e ffi ciency of the arylation (eqn (1)).
(1) Initial studies The reaction of amide 1a (0.3 mmol) with PhBr (0.4 mmol) in the presence of [RuCl2(p-cymene)]2/PPh3 as the catalyst and Na2CO3 as a base in toluene at 140 C for 18 h gave the orthophenylation product 2a in 46% NMR yield, along with 33% of recovered 1a (eqn (2)).
The use of 2 equivalents of PhBr improved the product yield to 86% NMR yield (82% isolated yield), with 1a being recovered in 3%.
Product yield was signi  cantly affected by the nature of base used: Li2CO3 0%, K2CO3 75%, Cs2CO3 19%, NaOAc 38%, KOAc 16%, CsOAc 7%, 2,6-lutidine 0%.
In most Ru-catalyzed arylation reactions of C – H bonds reported to date, N-methylpyrrolidinone (NMP) was the solvent of choice.
Contrary to these previous examples, when NMP was used in place of toluene, 2a was produced in only 25% yield.
Although carboxylic acids were well used as a co-catalyst in the Ru( )-catalyzed arylation reaction, the addition of a carboxylic acid, such as 1-adamantancarboxylic acid or MesCO2H did not result in the formation of 2a .
The addition of PPh3 was signi  cantly important.
No reaction took place when the reaction was carried out in the absence of PPh3.
The use of PCy3 gave 2a only in 38% yield.
The e ffi ciency of the reaction was not affected by the nature of the catalyst.
Among the Ru( ) catalysts examined, RuCl2(PPh3)3 (81%) and Ru(OAc)2(p-cymene) (85%) were found to be as equally effective as [RuCl2(p-cymene)]2.
(2) We next examined the effect of a directing group.
No reaction occurred when the corresponding N-benzyl benzamide ( 3 , Fig.1) and 2-pyridynylmethyl ester were used as the substrate in place of 1a , indicating that coordination in an N,N 0 -fashion by the 2-pyridinylmethylamine moiety is essential for the reaction to proceed.
Furthermore, the use of N-methyl amide 5 did not provide the phenylation product, indicating that the presence of a proton on the amide nitrogen is important for the reaction to proceed, although NH is not included in the product formation at  rst sight.
Amides having longer carbon chains, such as 6 , did not give the corresponding coupling product.
However, it was found that 2-methyl-N-(quinolin-8-yl)benzamide ( ) was also a good substrate and that 7a was more reactive than 1a .
A considerably higher yield of the phenylation product 8a was obtained when less PhBr (1.2 equivalents) was used at a lower reaction temperature of 130 C for shorter reaction time (15 h).
Similar to the reaction of 1a , the choice of base was important: Na2CO3 > K2CO3 [ Cs2CO3.
The addition of PPh3 was again signi  cantly important.
No reaction took place when the reaction was carried out in the absence of PPh3.
The following conditions were  nally selected as standard reaction conditions: the reaction of amide 7a (0.3 mmol) with PhBr (0.36 mmol) in the presence of [RuCl2(p-cymene)]2 (0.015 mmol), PPh3 (0.12 mmol), Na2CO3 (0.6 mmol) in toluene (2 mL) at 130 C for 15 h gave 8a in 80% isolated yield (eqn (3)).
(3) Synthetic scope With the optimized reaction conditions in hand, we examined the scope of the reaction.
Table 1 shows the results for the reaction of aromatic amides with an 8-quinolinyl group under standard reaction conditions.
A variety of functional groups were tolerated in the reaction and the reaction proceeded in a highly regioselective manner.
The reaction of meta-substituted substrates resulted in the selective phenylation at the less hindered C – H bonds, irrespective of the electronic nature of the substituent, indicating that the regioselectivity was controlled by the steric nature of the substituent groups.
A variety of aryl bromides or iodides were applicable to the arylation reaction, as shown in Table 2, however when phenyl chloride was used, 8e was produced in only a low yield.
Various functional groups, such as dimethylamino, methoxy, chloro, ester, tri  uoromethyl, and ketone groups, were tolerated in the reaction.
Electron-rich aryl bromides gave higher yields than electron-poor aryl bromides.
Various heteroaromatic bromides also participated in the present arylation reaction of C H bonds as coupling partners.
Mechanistic aspects To investigate the mechanism for the reaction, the deuterated amide was reacted for 1 h under otherwise standard reaction conditions (eqn (4)).
We observed a signi  cant amount of H/D exchange between at the ortho position (the d-content dropped from >98% to 34%) and on the nitrogen in the recovered amide.
Even for a shorter reaction time of 0.5 h in the absence of PhBr, a signi  cant amount of H/D exchange again occurred at the ortho position (the d-content dropped from >98% to 30%) and on the nitrogen (eqn (5)), indicating that the cleavage of C – H bonds is reversible and very rapid.
This result indicates that the cleavage of C – H bonds is likely not the rate determining step.
It was also found that PPh3 accelerates the cleavage of C H bonds.
When the reaction was run in the absence of PPh3 (eqn (5)), H/D exchange occurred at only 11% (89% d-content) at the ortho position.
(4) (5) To probe the electronic effects on the arylation, the reaction of an electronically different set of meta-substituted aromatic amides 7a–f with PhBr was carried out (see Table S1 in ESI † ).
A Hammett plot was constructed from the correlation for the conversion of 7a–f with s p for meta-substituted aromatic amides (Fig.2). The plot resulted in a linear  t with a positive slope of r ¼ 0.38, indicating that electron-withdrawing groups clearly facilitate the reaction.
We next carried out the reaction of 7d with an electronically different set of para-substituted aryl bromides (see Table S2 in ESI † ).
We observed a V-shaped Hammett plot, as shown in Fig.3. The Hammett plot shows two segments and the two r values for the two segments are 0.5 and +2.1, respectively.
This result suggests that the mechanism or rate-determining step for the reaction changes, depending on the nature of the substituents on the aryl bromides.
To collect additional information on the reaction mechanism, competition experiments using 4-dimethylaminophenyl bromide and methyl 4-bromobenzoate, both of which are highly active substrates, as shown in Fig.3, were carried out.
It was observed that 23 gave higher yields than 24 , irrespective of the electronic nature of the substituent at the meta position of the aromatic amide (eqn (6), Fig.4). However, the ratio of 23 and 24 decreased to close to 1 : 1 when the electron-donating nature of the substituents became stronger.
These results suggest that the electronic nature of a substituent in the aromatic amide is a dominant factor.
We next performed competition experiments of a mixture of 7f and 7c with three different aryl bromides (eqn (7)).
As shown in Fig. 3, Me2N- and MeO2C-substituted aryl bromides are highly reactive, but CF3-substituted aryl bromide is less reactive.
However, only 7f reacted to give 25 , 27 , or 29 in the competition experiments, irrespective of electronic nature of the substituent on the aryl bromide.
These results again suggest that the electronic nature of the substituent in the aromatic amide is a dominant factor.
(7) The directing group could be easily removed and recovered by hydrolysis under acidic conditions (eqn (8)).
(8) A proposed mechanism is shown in Scheme 1.
Coordination of the amide to the ruthenium center followed by ligand exchange with the concomitant generation of HX gives the ruthenium complex 31 , which undergoes reversible cyclometalation to give the complex probably via a concerted metalation – deprotonation (CMD) mechanism.
The oxidative addition of PhBr followed by reductive elimination gives 34 , which undergoes protonation to afford the phenylation product with the regeneration of ruthenium( ).
As shown in eqn (2), the cleavage of C H bonds is a reversible and rapid step, and is not the rate determining step.
The Hammett plots shown in Fig.2 and the region on the le in Fig.3 suggest that the reductive elimination is the rate-determining step and it proceeds through the transition state 35 , in which a developing negative charge is stabilized by the carbonyl group and the substituents.
If the oxidative addition of PhBr to is the rate determining step, the Hammett r shown should be a straight line with a positive slope in Fig.3 because electron-de  cient aryl bromides accelerate the oxidative addition.
However, a V-shaped Hammett plot was observed in Fig.3, suggesting that the rate determining step changes depending on the substituent on the aryl bromide.
These collective results suggest that the reaction is dominantly affected by the electronic nature of the substituent R in the aromatic amides.
However, the reaction is also accelerated by the electron-withdrawing nature of the substituent X in the aryl bromides.
This suggests that the oxidative addition proceeds through a nucleophilic substitution mechanism as in 36 .
The equilibrium position can be shi ed to 33 from 32 by the electron-withdrawing groups, such as an ester and a ketone functional group on the ArBr.
We report on the Ru( )-catalyzed arylation of ortho C(sp2) H bonds in aromatic amides, in which the presence of a bidentate directing group, such as 2-pyridynylmethylamino or 8-aminoquiloline is essential for the arylation to proceed.
The reaction proceeds in a highly selective manner at the less hindered C – H bonds of meta-substituted aromatic amides.
Contrary to most Ru-catalyzed ortho-arylations, in which NMP is a solvent of choice, a common solvent, such as toluene gave the best results in the present system.
Although the mechanism is not currently completely understood, dramatically different slopes were obtained in Hammett plots.
The elucidation of the mechanism for the reaction is the subject of current investigations.
This work was supported, in part, by a Grant-in-Aid for Scienti  c Research on Innovative Areas &quot;Molecular Activation Directed toward Straightforward Synthesis&quot; from The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
A previous proposal that nitrite anion can be formed by oxidation of CH3CN by metallic Pd and air, leading to cyclo(ortho)palladated complexes containing nitrite anion, (eg) Pd(NO2)(C^N)L (C^N ¼ papaverine; L ¼ CH3CN or DMSO) can be explained by Pd3(OAc)5NO2 acting as the nitrite source.
Finally, photocrystallographic metastable linkage isomerisation and complete conversion to an oxygen-bound nitrito complex Pd( h -ONO)(C^N)PPh3 has been observed.
Palladium( ) acetate, Pd(OAc)2, is used extensively in synthesis and catalysis, for which high purity material can be important.
It is well-established that anionic ligands (pseudohalides, (eg) acetate) exert a profound effect in Pd-catalysed cross-coupling reactions involving the activation of both C–X and C–H bonds.
In recent years N-centred electron-deficient anions have shown remarkable catalytic effects, either as spectator ligands or substrates in their own right ((eg) in Pd /Pd chemistry).
In our recent work on the Pd/Cu-mediated direct arylation (catalytic C–H functionalisation) of 2 0 -deoxyadenosines, Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 (pip ¼ piperidine) was identified as an effective precatalyst.
The complex is formed by reaction of Pd(OAc)2 with piperidine (2 eq.with respect to Pd) in THF at ambient temperature; indeed other secondary amines may be used to access a variety of Pd(OAc)2(HNR2)2 complexes, which are highly effective precatalysts for Suzuki–Miyaura crosscouplings.
In follow-up studies Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 was found to be accompanied by Pd(OAc)(NO2)(pip)2 in a ratio of 2.4 : 1 (as determined by H NMR spectroscopy – see ESI†, and Scheme 1).
The appearance of nitrite anion (NO2), and the characterisation of Pd-nitrito complexes, is the main subject of this paper.
Both Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 and Pd(OAc)(NO2)(pip)2 complexes are separable (unless specified ‘NO2’ is bonded through the nitrogen atom to Pd ), and their structures have been independently confirmed by LIFDI mass spectrometry, elemental analysis and single-crystal X-ray diffraction.
The X-ray crystal structures of Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 and Pd(OAc)(NO2)(pip)2 are shown in Fig.1. The absence of H2O molecules in the unit cell for Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 allows a reliable comparison of the structure.
The key bond distances for Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 are Pd–Npip ¼ 2.0560(13) and Pd–O ¼ 2.0093(11) A.
In Pd(OAc)(NO 2 )(pip)2 both Pd–Npip bonds are elongated by comparison, Pd–Npip ¼ 2.0738(17) and 2.0690(17) A; the same is true for the Pd–O bond {2.0417(14) A}, indicative of a trans-NO2 group {Pd–NO2 bond distance is 1.9962(18) A}.
After much deliberation regarding the possible sources of nitrite anion, a substantial nitrite impurity was considered most likely.
Cotton and Murillo highlighted the non-trivial behaviour of Pd(OAc)2.
This trinuclear ‘triangle’ complex, formally Pd3(OAc)6, has a nearly idealized D3h symmetry in the solid state (Fig.2). In the presence of trace H2O in CDCl3 ((eg) laboratory grade CDCl3), Pd3(OAc)6 readily gives Pd3(OAc)6(OH2) (H2O disrupts one bridging acetate group, resulting in desymmetrization).
Pd3(OAc)6 is prepared by oxidation of metallic Pd (derived from PdCl2) with HNO3–AcOH, and as a consequence of poor N2 flow, nitrogen oxides bring about the formation of Pd3(OAc)5NO2.
H NMR spectroscopic analysis of our commercial source of Pd3(OAc)6 in CDCl3 revealed the presence ofPd3(OAc)5NO2 (by comparison withauthenticmaterial, 95% purity, and supported by IR spectroscopic analysis).
Elemental analysis of the impure commercial Pd(OAc)2 material established the ratio of Pd3(OAc)5NO2: Pd3(OAc)6 as 4.3 : 1 (81% Pd3(OAc)5NO2; OAc : NO2 ligand ratio 6.4 : 1).
The data correlates with the observed Pd(OAc)2(pip)2 : 1Pd(OAc)(NO2)(pip)2 ratio of 2.4 : 1 from the synthesis (vide supra), (eg) a ligand ratio of OAc:NO2, ca.5.8 : 1 (Scheme 1).
Other commercial sources of Pd(OAc)2 likely contain nitrite impurities, the question is how much? (see ESI† for a comparison of unnamed commercial samples in the Department of Chemistry at York).
In all cases tested nitrite impurities have been identified.
The impact of nitrite impurities from Pd(OAc)2 on catalytic efficacy has not been previously assessed ((eg) in Pd-catalysed cross-couplings).
However, given the limited reports of issues with Pd(OAc)2 in catalytic cross-couplings and our early findings we suspect that NO2 anion is generally benign, with the caveat that some processes may show differences.
On a general note, this impurity can be missed as Pd(OAc)2 purity is often determined by its total Pd content; ‘OAc’ and ‘NO2’ have similar relative molecular masses thus the NO2 impurity is not picked up {vis-a-vis Pd3(OAc)6 vs.Pd3(OAc)5NO2}.
We considered that the NO2 impurities in Pd(OAc)2 could explain observations reported on the synthesis of cyclopalladated nitrito Pd complexes ((eg) 4 CH3CN and 4 DMSO, Scheme 2).
It was found that the reaction of Pd(OAc)2 with papaverine 3 in CH3CN at reflux in air for 3.5 h (filtered whilst hot to remove metallic Pd residues) gave a filtrate containing 4 CH3CN, which precipitates out of solution (overnight).
Recrystallization of this precipitate from warm DMSO afforded 4 DMSO.
The source of nitrite was explained by oxidation of CH3CN mediated by metallic Pd and air (presumably a stoichiometric process), although not proven.
In light of our findings the reaction of papaverine 3 with pure (>99%) Pd3(OAc)6 under air using reagent grade CH3CN (at reflux for 3.5 h) was repeated (several times).
In all cases precipitateswereslowtoappear(ca.3–14daysat5 C), although 3 had been fully consumed (as shown by H NMR spectroscopy).
Eventually,ayellowsemi-crystallinematerialappearedwhichwas filtered and analysed.
Elemental analysis and LIFDI mass spectrometricanalysisshowedthismaterialtohavethecompositionof [Pd(OAc)(C^N)] and not [Pd(NO2)(C^N)].
H NMR spectroscopy (in d6-DMSO) revealed that cyclopalladation had occurred, and whilst being similar to the data for 4 DMSO, some differences were apparent (vide infra).
A series of control reactions with triply-distilled CH3CN (from AlCl3,Li2CO3 andCaH2),inboththepresenceandabsenceofair, gavethesameproductasdetailedabove.
IntheabsenceofDMSO the product formed was suspected to be 5 CH3CN.
However, crystallisation from CH3CN actually gave a novel dimeric Pd acetate bridged complex 6 (representative of the bulk material).
The complex crystallises in the triclinic space group P1, with one dimeric complex and three CH3CN molecules in the asymmetric unit (Fig.3). N-coordination (from the papaverine ligand) to Pd leads to a pseudo-anti relationship of the two palladated ligands; the N(1)–Pd(1)–Pd(2)–N(2) torsion angle ¼ 74.59(10); N(1)– Pd(1) and N(2)–Pd(s) bond distances ¼ 2.033(2) and 2.032(2) A, respectively.
Whereas the palladacyclic moiety 2 {containing Pd(2)} is slightly twisted as a result of modest p – p stacking interactions between neighbouring quinolinyl groups (ca.
4.1 A between both aromatic ring systems).
The Pd(1)–Pd(2) bond distance is 3.0258(4) A.
Thus in the solid state and in the presence of CH3CN, 5 CH3CN is not observed, and only binuclear Pd complex 6 CH3CN is obtained.
Moreover, there was no sign of nitrite anion.
The reaction of an impure batch of Pd(OAc)2 (ca.81% Pd3(OAc)5NO2) with papaverine 3, in dry CH3CN and under a N2 atmosphere, afforded a mixture of products (Fig.4, spectrum A). A similar spectrum was observed on running the reaction (not shown) in the presence of air (note: papaverine 3, indicated by magenta circles, does not precipitate from CH3CN solutions; also, 3 is not observed in the crude H NMR spectra of the reaction products).
The reaction run with pure Pd(OAc)2 (>99%) under N2 afforded what appears to be a cyclometallated product in 67% yield (green circles), which has the same H NMR spectrum as the crystalline material of 6 (compare spectra B and C, Fig.4). This material is either a mixture of isomeric dinuclear compounds in DMSO-d6 solution, or mononuclear and dinuclear compounds.
‡ Dissolution of crystalline 6 in pyridine-d5 gave a single mononuclear complex [Pd(OAc)(C^N)pyr-d5], (5 pyr-d5) (see ESI†).
Moreover, a stable phosphine adduct of 6 could be formed by reaction with PPh3 (1 : 1, Pd : PPh3) affording mononuclear complex [Pd(OAc)(C^N)PPh3] (7) in 39% yield.
H NMR spectroscopy showed the expected four singlet proton resonances for the methoxy groups at d 4.09, 3.97, 3.69 and 2.91; proton resonances for papaverine and phenyl moieties, two pseudo-diastereotopic palladacylic methylene protons ( d 4.96 4.82, broad doublets, JH,H ca.
12 Hz), and methyl singlet resonance for the acetoxy group ( d 1.21).
An X-ray structure showed that complex 7 crystallised in the monoclinic C2/c space group (Fig.5).
The N(1)–Pd(1) bond distance {2.091(2) A} is longer than the equivalent N–Pd bond found in 6 (2.033(2) A).
The palladacycle once again sits in a boat conformation.
The ratio of OAc : NO2 containing-products in spectrum A is estimated as 1 : 0.6 (by H NMR spectroscopy), and whilst this does not match the OAc : NO2 ratio in the impure Pd(OAc)2 batch, it can be accounted for by the low overall yield (27%) (which is consistent with considerable Pd degradation and Pd black formation).
To account for the other major component in spectrum A (Fig.4) an authentic sample of 4 needed to be prepared.
Reaction of 6 CH3CN with NaNO2 (10 eq.) gave 4 in 69% yield (exact composition [Pd(NO2)(C^N)CH3CN] 1.5H2O, which compares well to the reported composition [Pd(NO2)(C^N)CH3CN] 3H2O; the H NMR spectrum (in DMSO-d6) is shown as D (Fig.4), which resembles the other component in the reaction of 3 with impure Pd(OAc)2 (orange circles).
Thus, using impure Pd(OAc)2 both CH3CN adducts of 4 and 6 are observed under the reaction conditions, whereas using pure Pd(OAc)2, 6 is the only product (as a mixture of either isomeric, mononuclear or dinuclear compounds, verified by the independent synthesis of 7).
‡ We therefore conclude that nitrite impurities can explain the formation of nitrite adducts from Pd(OAc)2 and papaverine 3 (in the presence or absence of air).
In preparing the authentic sample of complex 4 we were keen to crystallographically characterise its structure.
Whilst this was not possible for either 4 CH3CN or 4 DMSO, we were able to prepare the PPh3 adduct from the reaction of 4 CH3CN with PPh3 (1 : 1 ratio) in CH2Cl2 at reflux for 2 h.
H and P NMR spectroscopy showed the presence of only one compound, proposed as being [Pd(NO2)(C^N)PPh3] 8 (formed quantitatively).
A single crystal of this complex was initially studied by X-ray diffraction methods (in York), revealing that the PPh3 was coordinated (as expected), but as a mixture ‘Pd– h -NO2’ (8a) and ‘Pd– h -ONO’ (8b) isomers.
It is known that nitrito complexes of Ni exhibit linkage isomerisation (by photoexcitation), indeed examples are of interest as potential data storage devices.
Thus, more comprehensive photocrystallographic experiments were conducted using synchrotron radiation.
An X-ray data set was collected in the absence of light at 150 K on beamline I19 at the Diamond Light Source, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK, and the structure solved and refined.
Complex 8 crystallizes in the monoclinic space group P21/c and exists as a ca.1 : 3 mixture of ‘Pd– h -NO2’ (8a) and ‘Pd– h ONO’ (8b) linkage isomers (Table 1 and Fig.6) at this temperature.
The crystal was then irradiated at 150 K using a specifically designed LED ring, which supports six 400 nm LEDs in a circle, 1 cm from the crystal to ensure uniform irradiation.
After 1 h the crystal structure was redetermined and it was found that the photoactivated nitrito complex ‘Pd– h -ONO’ (8b) is fully formed (100% conversion).
Further irradiation (1.5 h) caused no appreciable change, confirming the 100% nitrito form to be a photostationary state.
Notably, this isomer is retained at 150 K in the dark (over 1 h), showing that the system is metastable under these conditions.
The Pd– h -ONO’ (8b) isomeric structure remains in the same space group P21/c, with little change in the packing arrangement and only a D V ¼ 0.14% increase in the unit cell volume observed, in comparison to the initially determined mixed-isomer structure.
Variable-temperature parametric studies (VT) determined that the metastable state exists on warming to 180 K, however further heating to 200 K causes the system to revert back to its mixed-isomer structure initially observed at 150 K.
Recent studies for another mixed nitro : nitrito Ni complex have shown that conversion between isomers can also be controlled thermally.
As such, in separate experiments on Station 11.3.1 at the Advanced Light Source, Berkeley, California, USA, a single crystal of 8 was slow-cooled in-situ and a series of identical datasets collected at regular intervals to monitor any changes in nitro : nitrito occupation.
Conversion to the nitrito isomer, 8b, was found to increase, from 76% at ambient temperature to a maximum 86% on slow cooling to 150 K (Table 2).
The increase in 8b on slowly decreasing the temperature indicates that the major component is the more thermodynamically stable isomer at lower temperatures, which correlates with results obtained for the Ni system.
The close agreement between the conversion observed at room temperature and the initial structure determined in the photocrystallographic experiments indicate that flash-cooling of the crystal appears to thermally trap the system in its ambient state.
In summary, the appearance of nitrite anion in Pd(OAc)(NO2)(pip)2 can be traced to nitrite impurities found in some commercial sources of Pd(OAc)2.
Furthermore, the appearance of nitrite anion in a palladacycle-derived from papaverine 3 and Pd(OAc)2 in CH3CN can be explained in the same way.
The impact of nitrite impurities in two catalytic reactions has been assessed; Pd3(OAc)6 and Pd3(OAc)5NO2 exhibiting similar catalytic efficacy.
Reductive elimination of nitrite and organic fragments from Pd /Pd , leading to C–NO2 bond formation, is slow thus NO2 can be considered as a spectator ligand.
Our studies highlight the need to assess the effect of nitrite impurities in reactions involving Pd(OAc)2, especially in stoichiometric coordination chemistry.
We have determined that NO2 is not generated in situ in the reactions detailed above.
The interesting solid-state isomerism behaviour in the palladacyclic complex 8 marks the first reported observation of nitro–nitrito linkage isomerism in a Pd complex, with both the photocrystallographic and thermal investigations comparing well with other studies involving nitro–nitrito linkage isomers.
This type of linkage isomerisation could be important in the transfer of nitrite to organic fragments, (eg) in C–N bonding forming processes.
Reductive elimination of nitrite, leading to C–N bond-formation ((eg) nitration of papaverine) has not been observed in our study, an outcome that can be explained by the ‘Pd–ONO’ form being the predominant isomer in these palladacycles (C–O bond formation is considered unlikely).
Crucially, this part of our study demonstrates the uniqueness of the catalytic ‘C–NO2’ bond forming process that has recently been developed.
Accordingly, it would be interesting to study reductive elimination from ‘Pd–NO2’/‘Pd–ONO’ species.
Professor Melanie Sanford (University of Michigan, USA) and Dr.Christopher Richards (UEA, UK) are thanked for discussions.
We gratefully acknowledge Dr.Tony Wild for his financial support of a PhD studentship (to S.E. B.). The Royal Society and EPSRC (T.E. S. and T. J. W. PhD studentships) are acknowledged for funding.
We also thank Diamond Light Source Ltd and the Advanced Light Source for the award of beamtime.
The Advanced Light Source is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.
S. Department of Energy under Contract No.DE-AC0205CH11231. P. R. R. is also grateful to the EPSRC for the award of a Senior Fellowship.
Transition-metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are among the most straightforward and versatile methods in organic synthesis.
These reactions typically involve two prefunctionalized coupling partners, such as a vinyl or aryl halide and an organometallic reagent.
More recently, the synthetic community has focused on direct functionalization of C – H bonds of arenes and heteroarenes, because C – H functionalizations are more atom-economical and minimize the costs of prefunctionalization.
Currently, much of this effort has been concentrated on direct functionalization of sp3 C – H bonds.
Despite this effort, the intermolecular arylation of weakly acidic sp3 C – H bonds in the absence of directing groups remains challenging.
Our initial approach to direct functionalization and arylation of weakly acidic benzylic sp3-hybridized C – H bonds (ArCH2 – Z, Z ¼ H, Ph NR2, OR) relied on acidi cation of the benzylic C – H's by coordination of the arene substrates to Cr(CO)3 in the form of ( h 6 -ArCH2 – Z)Cr(CO)3 complexes (Scheme 1A).
This strategy was amenable to the  rst catalytic asymmetric arylation of benzylic amines (Scheme 1B).
The novelty of this approach, however, was moderated by the use of stoichiometric chromium.
To circumvent this issue, we recently reported the  rst palladiumcatalyzed deprotonative-cross-coupling process (DCCP) for sp3 C – H arylation of unactivated diarylmethane derivatives in the absence of chromium.
This protocol enables the synthesis of a variety of sterically and electronically diverse aryl- and heteroaryl containing triarylmethanes (Scheme 1C).
Triarylmethane derivatives exhibit interesting applications in material science and are also important in medicinal chemistry.
It is noteworthy that the reaction in Scheme 1C can be conducted at room temperature with most substrates and that only 1.2 equiv. diarylmethane is necessary in the majority of cases.
The catalyst system is very effective, providing an average yield of >90% for the 33 triarylmethanes synthesized in the initial study.
High throughput experimentation (HTE) techniques were used to optimize parameters in this reaction leading to a unique base/catalyst combination (Scheme 1C).
Surprisingly, of the 12 bases examined during the development and optimization of this reaction, only KN(SiMe3)2 a orded the desired DCCP products in good to excellent yields (Scheme 1C).
Related alkali metal-bis(trimethylsilyl)amide bases [MN(SiMe3)2, M ¼ Li, Na] as well as tert-butoxide bases [MO-t-Bu, M ¼ Li, Na, K] failed to show even trace conversion.
We hypothesized that additives might in  uence the performance of LiN(SiMe3)2, NaN(SiMe3)2 and potentially other bases and turn on the DCCP to afford triarylmethane products (Scheme 2).
Additionally, we hoped the use of additives would improve reaction yields of problematic substrates and result in milder reaction conditions.
A search of the additive literature led to an unexpected result: despite the enormous number of palladium catalyzed processes published in the last 20 years, we were not able to  nd previous systematic studies on the use of Lewis basic additives for the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling processes with weakly acidic sp3 C – H bonds.
Yet these reactions are increasingly popular in the e ffi cient and economical synthesis of biologically active compounds.
Thus, inspired by the use of additives in di erent types of reactions, we set out to evaluate the impact of additives on the DCCP in Scheme 2.
We now disclose four conditions with different additives and bases that not only turn on the DCCP with previously unreactive LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2 bases, but actually afford better reaction conditions with certain challenging substrates relative to our original additive-free conditions.
2.1 Probing the role of the base in the absence of additives Before selecting additives for use in the DCCP (Scheme 2), a better understanding of the role of the base in room-temperature (23 C) Pd-catalyzed DCCP was necessary.
There are two widely accepted pathways for the C – H cleavage step in transition metal-catalyzed C – H arylation reactions: (1) C – H activation via a base-induced, concerted metallation deprotonation (CMD) pathway and (2) C – H deprotonation by base without participation of the transition metal.
The former is common for unactivated sp3 C – H arylations while the latter is widespread for activated sp3 C – H arylations.
To gain insight into the role of the base, we compared different bases of the type MN(SiMe3)2 (M ¼ Li, Na, K) by employing them in the DCCP of diphenylmethane ( 1a ) with 4tert-butyl bromobenzene ( 2a ) (Scheme 3, le  ).
Only KN(SiMe3)2 afforded the DCCP product 3aa with excellent yield.
In sharp contrast, LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2 showed no conversion.
To understand why these three alkali metal counterions exhibited dramatic differences in the DCCP, we carried out deprotonation/benzylation experiments with these three bases in cyclopentylmethyl ether (CPME) at room temperature (Scheme 3, right).
Again, only KN(SiMe3)2 afforded the benzylation product while LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2 failed to produce detectable amounts of product.
The results in the room temperature deprotonation/benzylation (Scheme 3) are consistant with the room-temperature DCCP and suggest a reaction pathway for the DCCP involving direct deprotonation of the substrate without the participation of the palladium catalyst.
To further test the hypothesis above, we compared KN(SiMe3)2 and LiN(SiMe3)2 in the room-temperature deprotonation/benzylation and DCCP experiments with 2-benzylpyridine ( 1b , Scheme 4).
The benzylic hydrogens of 2- benzylpyridine are considerably more acidic (p Ka ¼ 28.2) than those of diphenylmethane (pKa ¼ 32.3), which should facilitate room-temperature deprotonation/benzylation process with either of the two bases.
In agreement with our expectations, 2-benzylpyridine underwent benzylation in excellent yield in the presence of either KN(SiMe3)2 or LiN(SiMe3)2.
Both of the metallated 2-benzylpyridine species (organopotassium and organolithium) also participated in the catalytic DCCP to furnish the triarylmethane derivative 3ba in >95% yield.
These experiments point to the reactivity of the base and the acidity of the substrate as a key feature in the DCCP of diarylmethanes and lead us to hypothesize that additives that increase the reactivity of the base will have a bene  cial impact on formation of the DCCP product.
2.2 Additives background Several important contributions outlining the use of additives on various processes guided our choice of starting points.
In the past decade, advances have been made in exploiting the use of additives to improve synthetic performance in late transition metal-catalyzed reactions.
In 2001 Beller's group reported a detailed study on the effect of halide additives on the Heck reaction.
Recently, the groups of Nakamura, Furstner,¨ Cahiez, Cossy and Jacobi von Wangelin have described the use of N,N,N 0 ,N 0 -tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA) on the Fe-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions between Grignard reagents and alkyl halides while Hu et al. reported its use in the Ni-catalyzed sp3 – sp2 Kumada – Corriu – Tamao cross-coupling reaction.
Evano et al. as well as Shang and co-workers also explored TMEDA in cross-coupling reactions using alkynylcopper reagents.
We employed N,N,N 0 ,N 00 ,N 00 -pentamethyldiethylenetriamine (PMDTA) and TMEDA in the enantioselective DCCP of ( h 6 -ArCH2 – NR2)Cr(CO)3 complexes.
Another diamine, dimethylethylenediamine (DMEDA) has been described to signi cant accelerate Cu-catalyzed C – N crosscoupling reactions.
In several of these systems the role of these additives is unclear, although it has been suggested that in ironcatalyzed processes TMEDA can function as the ligand for the iron center while in Cu-catalyzed processes the role of DMEDA has been rationalized not only as acting as a ligand to copper but also helping to solublize the base and possibly serving as reducing agent.
A perspective published in 2010 by Buchwald and Surry discusses the use of diamine ligands in Cu catalysis.
Myristic acid as well as acetic acid were also reported by Buchwald as additives; the  rst in Cu-catalyzed C – N coupling methods and the latter facilitating activation of the catalyst in Pd-catalyzed N-arylation reactions.
Moreover, Buchwald highlighted the remarkable effect of catalytic amounts of phenolic additives on the Cu-catalyzed a -arylation of malonates and ketone enolates.
Considering organolithium chemistry, Collum's group has studied the impact of diamines on organolithium and lithium amide bases.
Furthermore, they have outlined the bene  cial effect of LiCl in accelerating ortho-lithiation reactions.
Knochel and co-workers developed a new class of mixed magnesium bisamides in combination with LiCl as active bases for the direct magnesiation and zincation of arenes and heteroarenes and they recently introduced the use of Lewis acids to promote the deprotonation of a variety of aromatic and heteroaromatic substrates for benzylic cross-coupling reactions.
In this same area, Hartwig's research group had shown the accelerating e ect of Lewis acids in Pd-catalyzed aminations and the effect of zinc additives and metal  uorides on palladium complexes to catalyze the arylation of trimethylsilyl enolates.
Finally, Trost has also shown the bene cial effect of Lewis acids like BF3 OEt2 in Pd-catalyzed asymmetric allylic substitutions.
These reports inspired our approach to identi  cation of additives for the DCCP in Scheme 2.2.
3 Examination of additives in deprotonation/benzylation studies To gain insight into the lack of reactivity of LiN(SiMe3)2 with diphenylmethane in both the benzylation and DCCP (Scheme 3), we decided to explore the use of additives, initially focusing on crown ethers.
It is well-known that 12-crown-4 has a high a ffi nity for lithium cations.
We, therefore, added 12-crown-4 to the reaction mixture of diphenylmethane ( 1a ), LiN(SiMe3)2, and benzyl chloride in CPME at room temperature (Scheme 5).
Under these conditions, the benzylation occurred in >95% assay yield, indicating that binding the lithium cation by the crown ether dramatically increased the kinetic basicity of LiN(SiMe3)2.
The enhanced reactivity in the presence of the crown ether is presumably due to the reduced degree of aggregation of the resulting lithium amide species.
With these results in hand, we decided to determine the range of additives that would increase the reactivity of LiN(SiMe3)2, NaN(SiMe3)2 and potentially other bases and thus generate the triarylmethane products starting from weakly acidic diphenylmethane substrates.
Recently HTE techniques have emerged as a powerful approach for the discovery of new and more active catalysts, and milder reaction conditions, for a wide variety of transformations.
We, therefore, decided to examine the impact of additives in the cross-coupling reaction between 4-tert-butyl bromobenzene ( 2a ) and diphenylmethane ( 1a ) against a range of bases and solvents using HTE techniques.
The additives were selected based on their ability to coordinate to the main-group counterions of the bases.
As a starting point, we employed our previously optimized additive-free conditions for the DCCP of 1a and 2a (5 mol% Pd(OAc)2, 7.5 mol% NiXantphos in CPME at rt).
In the present study, 6 different bases [KN(SiMe3)2, LiN(SiMe3)2, NaN(SiMe3)2, KOtBu, LiOtBu and NaOtBu] and 11 diverse additives including crown ethers (12-crown-4, 15-crown-5, 18-crown-6) and various amines and nitrogen-containing ligands [NEt3, TMEDA, N,N,N 0 ,N 0 -tetramethyl-1,3-propanediamine (TMPDA), N,N 0 -diisopropylethylenediamine, N,N-diethylethylenediamine, N,N dibenzylethylenediamine (DBED), PMDTA, 2,2 0 -bipyridine (bipy), 1,10-phenanthroline and 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (DABCO)] were screened (Scheme 6).
The 72-reaction additive screening was carried out by dosing diphenylmethane ( 1a , 12 m mol), 4-tert-butyl bromobenzene ( 2a , 10 m mol), and internal standard (biphenyl, 1 mol) in 100 m L of CPME into a 96 well plate containing 72-1 mL reaction vials.
The vials had been predosed with Pd(OAc)2 (5 mol %), NiXantphos (10 mol%), base (30 m mol) and additive (60 m mol, except for the control reactions).
The plate was prepared inside a glovebox under a nitrogen atmosphere and sealed for the reaction period.
The plate was then stirred for 12 h at room temperature outside the glovebox, opened to air, diluted with acetonitrile and the reaction mixtures subjected to HPLC analysis.
The product standard, starting materials, and internal standard were previously analyzed to determine their retention times and UV/vis spectra.
In an effort to identify the most generalized set of conditions, we focused our analysis on reactions generating coupled triarylmethane product 3aa in 10% HPLC assay yield (AY, Fig.1). These leads would then be further optimized in subsequent experiments.
The results of this study are illustrated graphically in Fig.1. Reactions in column 1 are the control reactions conducted without additive.
Wells B1, C1, D1, E1 and F1 contained only unreacted starting material and no triarylmethane product.
In contrast, KN(SiMe3)2 formed triarylmethane in >90% AY in the absence of additive (A1).
These results are consistent with our earlier report.
The combination of LiN(SiMe3)2/12-crown-4 (B2) and NaN(SiMe3)2/15-crown-5 (C2) rendered product 3aa in 97% and 91% AY, respectively, whereas 18-crown-6 was detrimental to the AY with KN(SiMe3)2 (A1 vs.A2). Amines are known to bind to lithium and increase the reactivity of lithium bases such as LDA and LiN(SiMe3)2.
Among the amine additives examined, reactions with TMEDA (C4), N,N 0 -diisopropylethylenediamine (C6) and PMDTA (C9) provided triarylmethane product in the presence of NaN(SiMe3)2, albeit in low yield (10 – 12% AY).
None of the other bases generated the DCCP product with or without the additives (see ESI † for details).
It is interesting to note that all additives employed in this initial study had a negative impact on reactions with KN(SiMe3)2 relative to the control reaction.
A  er identi  cation of the leads above, we performed multiparallel screening in 1 mL reaction vials to evaluate additive stoichiometry by employing 1, 2, 3, 6 and 8 equiv. additive in the presence of LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2.
The effect of temperature on AY was also examined.
We found that the loading of the crown ethers could be reduced from 6 equiv. to 1 equiv. at rt without dramatically impacting the reaction yield.
Reactions with amine additives performed better at high temperature (110 C compared to rt) using NaN(SiMe3)2 with 1 equiv. PMDTA (45% AY) being more promising than 6 equiv. TMEDA (32% AY) and 6 equiv. N,N 0 -diisopropylethylenediamine (15% AY) (see ESI † for details).
Based on the observation that the triamine PMDTA was more effective than the diamine TMEDA and the monoamine NEt3, we decided to evaluate the tetramine 1,1,4,7,10,10-hexamethyltriethylenetetramine (HMTETA).
A new screen using NaN(SiMe3)2 and several tetramine loadings in CPME at room temperature and 110 C revealed that 6 equiv. HMTETA at rt resulted in generation of the desired product in good to excellent yields (80% AY when 1.2 equiv. of diphenylmethane was used and 97% AY with 3 equiv. ; see ESI † for details).
Collectively, the results above indicate that the presence of crown ethers and amine additives enhance reactivity in the DCCP with Li- and NaN(SiMe3)2 bases.
With the successful identi  cation of crown ethers as additives with LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2 bases, we decided to examine solvents resembling crown ethers, such as DME (1,2dimethoxyethane) and diglyme.
Thus, we screened the initial 6 bases at three temperatures (rt, 50 C and 110 C) in CPME, DME and diglyme and in combination with various additive loadings (see ESI † for details).
The most promising results obtained from HTE screen are summarized in Table 1.
The combination of 6 equiv. of 12-crown-4 with 3 equiv. of LiN(SiMe3)2 in CPME rendered the desire product in 97% AY (95% isolated yield) at rt (Table 1, entry 2).
Unfortunately, we were not able to make the DCCP work as e ffi cient with lower loadings of 12-crown-4 (Table 1, entries 3 and 4).
The use of substoichiometric amounts of 15-crown-5 (30 mol%) with NaN(SiMe3)2, rendered the highest yield (quantitative AY, 96% isolated yield) of the desired product in CPME at rt (Table 1, entry 9).
Attempts to decrease the additive loading to 15 mol% or 3 mol% at rt were detrimental to the yield (Table 1, entries 11 and 14).
When the reactions were conducted at 110 C and the amount of diphenylmethane was increased to 3 equiv. , however, better assay yields were obtained (Table 1, entries 13 and 16).
The use of 6 equiv. HMTETA and NaN(SiMe3)2 at rt in CPME rendered 80% AY (86% isolated yield, Table 1, entry 17).
Of signi  cance, HMTETA is inexpensive and can be easily removed from the reaction mixture during the puri  cation of the product.
The coordinating solvent diglyme rendered good results (see ESI † ) but due to its reported toxicity (based on the MSDS), we used it as an additive instead of solvent.
Thus, diglyme (6 equiv. ) with NaN(SiMe3)2 at rt was the most suitable conditions, generating the desired product in 88% AY (78% isolated yield, Table 1, entry 20).
Bases MO-t-Bu did not show promising results even in the presence of the additives explored (see ESI † ).
It is of note that the microscale screening results (10 m mol) outlined above translated to laboratory scale (0.1 mmol) with excellent reproducibility.
The isolated yields are given in the last column of Table 1 in parentheses.
As illustrated in Table 1 four promising sets of conditions utilizing additives (Table 1, entries 2, 9, 17 and 20) were discovered (Conditions A: [LiN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. 12-crown-4]; Conditions B: [NaN(SiMe3)2/30 mol% 15-crown-5]; Conditions C: [NaN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. HMTETA] and Conditions D: [NaN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. diglyme]). We were interested in testing the substrate generality with Conditions A – D.
We investigated the DCCP of 5 aryl bromides ( 2a–2e ) bearing electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups as well as one sterically hindered aryl bromide ( ) with four diphenylmethane derivatives ( 1a–1d ) under the four sets of conditions highlighted in Table 1.
The reactions were conducted in a 96 well-plate, worked up and assay yields (based on 1H NMR spectroscopy and HPLC analysis) were obtained for all of the reactions.
Table 2 outlines the results obtained for each combination of aryl bromide and diarylmethane (see ESI † for details).
One of the triarylmethanes was prepared from two different sets of coupling partners, giving a total of 23 unique triarylmethane derivatives.
Overall, 21 of the 23 coupling combinations examined resulted in generation of triarylmethane products in fair to excellent yields (48 – 99%) with at least one of the conditions used.
This is particularly impressive because unactivated diphenylmethanes were not viable substrates in the absence of additives with LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2.
More speci  cally, 12 of these 20 triarylmethanes ( 3aa , 3ad , 3ae , 3ba , 3bb , 3bd , 3be , 3bf , 3da , 3dd , 3de and 3df ) were obtained in 90% yield using the additives.
p-Bromobenzotri  uoride ( 2c ) was reacted following our previous conditions.
A decrease in the amount of base along with an increase in the nucleophile loading were essential to avoid decomposition of the triarylmethane product.
Control reactions were conducted in the presence of KN(SiMe3)2 in CPME at rt for all substrate combinations.
Comparison of the results in Table 2 with the control experiments indicated that, in several cases the products were generated in comparable yields with the additive Conditions A – D and with the KN(SiMe3)2 control (see ESI † for details).
The most signi  cant improvements were seen in the formation of 4 new compounds ( 3bb , 3bc , 3cb and 3db ), which were accessed in higher yields employing the additive systems than with the controls with KN(SiMe3)2.
Speci  cally, product 3bb was obtained in 99% isolated yield with Conditions B [NaN(SiMe3)2/ 30 mol% 15-crown-5] vs.68% AY with KN(SiMe3)2, 3bc was accessed in 78% isolated yield with Conditions A [LiN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. 12-crown-4] vs. 5% AY with KN(SiMe3)2, 3cb was achieved in 51% isolated yield with Conditions A [LiN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. 12-crown-4] vs. 17% AY with KN(SiMe3)2, and 3db was produced in 76% isolated yield using Conditions A [LiN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. 12-crown-4] vs. 50% AY with KN(SiMe3)2 (see ESI † for details).
Importantly, scale-up to laboratory scale using 0.1 mmol of substrates were similar to those determined in microscale experiments.
We next decided to probe the utility of the four sets of additive conditions and explore the cross-coupling reaction with six challenging aryl bromides ( 2g–2l ) that failed or gave very low yields of desired products with diphenylmethane ( 1a ) under the original conditions using KN(SiMe3)2 in CPME.
HTE in 1 mL vials was used to screen these 24 reactions (Scheme 7).
Fig.2 shows the most promising results obtained from the HTE screen.
We observed that p-bromobenzonitrile ( 2g ) and 2bromopyridine ( 2i ) rendered the desired product in good assay yield (high ratio product/internal standard) with at least one set of conditions used.
The promising leads were then scaled to laboratory scale.
Conditions A [LiN(SiMe3)2/6 equiv. 12-crown-4] with p-bromobenzonitrile ( 2g ) was the most effective affording 67% isolated yield of the desired coupled product ( 3ag ).
In contrast, 34% isolated yield was obtained with Conditions B [NaN(SiMe3)2/30 mol% 15-crown-5].
These results represented a signi  cant improvement over those of the control using KN(SiMe3)2, which afforded the corresponding triarylmethane 3ag in only 16% isolated yield.
Because functionalization of pyridines and related heterocycles is very important in medicinal chemistry, we examined heteroaryl bromide substrates 2i–2l .
2-Bromopyridine ( 2i ) successfully underwent DCCP affording 75% isolated yield of desired product with Conditions A and 37% isolated yield with Conditions B.
No product was observed with the control, KN(SiMe3)2 or in the absence of the palladium catalyst with KN(SiMe3)2.
In the case of p-Br-C6H4 – CO2Et ( 2h ), the only product observed in moderate yield corresponded to the attack of the diphenylmethyl anion on the carbonyl group of ester.
With substrates 3-bromopyridine, 2-bromothiophene, or 3bromothiophene ( 2j–l ), no triarylmethane products were observed in the presence or absence of additives under our current DCCP conditions and remain challenging.
Having proved that substrates 2g and 2i successfully underwent DCCP with diphenylmethane ( ) under Conditions A and B, we decided to explore their reactivity with diarylmethanes 1b–1d using Conditions A – D.
HTE in 1 mL vials was employed to screen these 24 reactions.
Table 3 summarizes the results obtained from this screening.
Assay yields (based on 1H NMR spectroscopy and HPLC analysis) were obtained for each combination of aryl bromide and diarylmethane (see ESI for details).
The additive systems enabled access to four new products ( 3bg , 3bi , 3dg and 3di ) in good to excellent yields and in all cases, superior results were obtained compared to control conditions with KN(SiMe3)2 (see Table 3).
p-Bromobenzonitrile ( 2g ) showed excellent reactivity with diarylmethane 1b under Conditions A and B.
The product ( 3bg ) was obtained in 86% isolated yield using Conditions A.
No reactivity was observed when 2g was allowed to react with 1c while only Conditions B rendered product although in poor yield (26% isolated yield).
Substrate 2i gave the corresponding product 3bi in high yield under Conditions A – C with C being the most promising (96% isolated yield).
Product 3di was achieved in 85% isolated yield using Conditions A but no desired product was observed for the reaction of 2i with diarylmethane 1c .
Substrate 1c is the least acidic diarylmethane of those examined in this study.
Overall, twenty six triarylmehtane derivatives were synthesized in good to excellent yields using the additives.
In particular, ten of the compounds prepared showed better results with the additive conditions than under the control conditions using KN(SiMe3)2 in CPME in the absence of additive.
This is impressive when it is considered that in the original study of 33 substrate combinations with KN(SiMe3)2, the triarylmethane products were isolated with an average yield of 91%.
Lewis basic additives can dramatically alter the outcome of reactions by coordination to reagents that possess main-group metals.
Despite the well known bene  cial impact of additives in a diverse range of chemical transformations, we are not aware of thorough studies concerning the effect of Lewis basic additives on metal-catalyzed C – H arylation reactions involving deprotonation of substrates possessing weakly acidic C – H bonds.
This class of reactions is very important and includes enolate C-arylation processes and the DCCP of diarylmethanes, among others.
In this report, we have conducted a study on the use of additives in the DCCP of sp3 C – H bonds of diphenylmethane derivatives with aryl bromides to form synthetically useful triarylmethanes.
A number of potential mono- and polydentate Lewis basic additives were selected for examination.
Highthroughput experimentation techniques were employed on microscale to rapidly identify the most promising additives and guide the optimization of the reaction conditions (additive stoichiometry, base, solvent and temperature).
These studies have resulted in development of four e ffi cient Pd-catalyzed procedures that rely on additives to enable the generation of a range of aryl- and heteroaryl containing triarylmethanes.
The most useful additives discovered for this process are polydentate ethers (12-crown-4, 15-crown-5, and diglyme), and the tetradentate amine 1,1,4,7,10,10-hexamethyltriethylenetetramine (HMTETA).
A bene  t of these additives is that all are commercially available and relatively inexpensive.
It is particularly noteworthy that the bases used in these new procedures, LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2, fail to promote formation of detectable amounts of triarylmethane coupling products with unactivated diarylmethanes in the absence of the additives.
Presumably these additives enhance the reactivity of LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2 by coordination to the main group metal and reducing their aggregation state.
It is interesting to note that in the combination of NaN(SiMe3)2 with 15-crown-5, the crown ether is used in substoichiometric quantity (30 mol %).
In contrast to LiN(SiMe3)2 and NaN(SiMe3)2, the use of KN(SiMe3)2 with additives gives inferior results relative to reactions without additives.
Finally, it is important to mention that the new procedures employing additives result in a signi  cant improvement in the reaction yields with certain substrates.
In the most striking example, 2-bromopyridine, which failed to undergo DCCP under the original conditions with KN(SiMe3)2, resulted in 75% yield with LiN(SiMe3)2 and 12-crown-4.
Because a variety of important C – H functionalizations involve a deprotonation step (Sonogashira reaction, a -arylation of carbonyl compounds, benzylic C – H arylations of aromatics and heteroaromatics, etc.) we envision potential applications of the additives outlined herein to facilitating these classes of reactions and thus enabling increased access to chemical diversity and to the discovery of new reactions.
We thank the National Science Foundation [CHE-0848460, (GOALI), 0848467 and 1152488 to PJW] for support of this research.
Over the past thirty years palladium-catalyzed coupling reactions have become powerful tools for generating carbon – carbon and carbon – heteroatom bonds.
Key to the success of such couplings is the e ffi cient generation of a phosphine-ligated Pd(0) species to enter into the catalytic cycle.
Common commercially available Pd(0) sources such as Pd2(dba)3 and Pd(PPh3)4 contain ligands that can interfere with the reaction.
Commercial Pd2(dba)3 has also recently been shown to contain varying amounts of Pd nanoparticles and free dba.
To avoid this problem, Pd( ) sources, such as Pd(OAc)2 and PdCl2, are sometimes used, though these must be reduced in situ.
O  en the e ffi ciency of these reductions is inadequate for a wide range of coupling reactions.
Recently, solutions to the problem of catalyst activation have taken the form of readily activated palladium precatalysts.
Many such systems have been reported, including the pyridinestabilized NHC precatalysts (PEPPSI), ligated allylpalladium chloride precatalysts, imine-derived precatalysts, and the palladacycle-based precatalysts 1 and 2 previously reported by our group (Fig.1).
) source, which forms a ligated Pd(0) species in situ when exposed to base.
While both MIT chemists and the Merck Process Group have successfully employed palladacyclic precatalysts in various transformations, those previously reported versions still suffer from drawbacks.
For example, the  rst reported synthesis of 1 required three steps and involved the handling of organometallic intermediates.
Recently, Vicente et al. reported a de  alternative procedure for the synthesis of 1 , which involved a C – H activation/cyclopalladation sequence starting from Pd(OAc)2.
However this procedure also required the use of tri  ic acid and an additional ion exchange step.
In 2010 we developed a class of biarylamine-derived precatalysts 2 as a more convenient alternative to 1 .
A similar C – H activation/cyclopalladation sequence, as discovered by Albert et al. , also provides access to precatalyst 2 in a one-pot procedure from Pd(OAc)2 which does not require the handling of any organometallic intermediates.
Precatalysts of type 2 , however, cannot be generated with larger ligands such as tBuXPhos and BrettPhos.
Additionally, these precatalysts are not stable in solution for extended periods of time.
Thus, access to a precatalyst system with enhanced stability and broader range of ligands would be highly desirable.
Herein we report the development of a series of novel precatalysts based on a cyclopalladated 2-aminobiphenylmesylate backbone.
We postulated that precatalysts related to 2 that incorporated larger ligands might be accessible by rendering the Pd( ) center more electron-poor via replacement of the chloride with a more electron-withdrawing species.
Additionally, we thought that a non-coordinating anion could allow for the incorporation of larger ligands by making the palladium center less sterically encumbered.
A  er evaluating a variety of halides and pseudohalides, it was ultimately found that palladium precatalysts that are analogues of 2 with the chloride replaced by a methanesulfonate group (Scheme 1, 6a–6n ) could be readily prepared with both BrettPhos and tBuXPhos.
Moreover, this new class of precatalyst allowed us to meet our secondary goal: to retain the ease of preparation and stability of precatalysts of general structure .
As detailed in Scheme 1, m -OMs dimer 5 is generated in high yield from commercially available 2-aminobiphenyl 3 via a sequence involving mesylate salt formation and cyclopalladation.
To demonstrate the practicality of this process, the reaction was performed with 315 g of mesylate salt 4 to afford 417 g m -OMs 5 (96% yield) a  er isolation directly from the reaction mixture.
Reactions of a wide array of synthetically important ligands with -OMs 5 in THF or dichloromethane proceed smoothly (15 – 45 minutes) to afford the desired palladacycle precatalyst .
Because of their versatility and broad applicability as ligands for palladium-catalyzed reactions, L1–L14 (Fig.2) were selected as an ideal set of ligands to test for compatibility with our mesylate precatalyst structure 6 .
We found that all of the ligands in combination with 5 afforded precatalysts 6a–6n in excellent yields with short reaction times.
In fact, due to their high solubility and fast rate of formation, precatalysts 6a–6n can also be prepared and used in situ, directly from m -OMs dimer 5 .
This operationally facile process should allow for rapid testing of an array of ligands for a desired chemical transformation using a single palladium precursor.
In order to investigate the role of the mesylate anion leading to the broader scope of ligands that can be incorporated into precatalysts 6 , we carried out 1H NMR studies of d5-pyridine complexes derived from m -dimers 5 and 7 .
As shown in Fig. 3, treatment of 0.05 mmol samples of m -dimers 5 and 7 with 10 m L of d5-pyridine in 0.75 mL CD2Cl2 afforded the d5-pyridine complexes and 9 in situ.
The resonance for the NH2 group of complex 9 is shi  ed down  eld by 0.76 ppm units relative to that of complex 8 , suggesting a more electron de  cient palladium center is present in 9 .
Single crystal X-ray crystal structures of precatalyst 2 with L1 as the supporting ligand, 2 L1 , 2 with BINAP as the supporting ligand, 2 L13 , and precatalysts 6a , 6b , 6c and 6m provide additional structural evidence suggesting enhanced electrophilicity of the palladium mesylate center.
All of these complexes feature a tetracoordinate palladium( ) center with slightly distorted square planar geometries.
In the case of 2 L1 , 6a , 6b , and 6c the 2-aminobiphenyl ligand chelates the palladium center and in each species the phosphine ligand is in the cis conformation relative to the aryl moiety of the 2-aminobiphenyl carbon bound to palladium.
It is also worth noting Chemical Science Edge Article that in each of these species the corresponding Pd – P, Pd – N and Pd – C bond lengths are nearly identical to each other between the four complexes.
In 2 L1 and 6a the chloride and mesylate anions are bound to palladium with bond lengths of 2.412 A ˚ and 2.184 A respectively (Fig.4). While the two species are ˚ structurally very similar, preliminary in silico studies indicate that the palladium center in 6a is a more electron de  cient species.
The differences between 2 and 6 are pronounced in chelating bis-phosphines.
In 6m both phosphines of the BINAP ligand are coordinated to the palladium center with the mesylate anion dissociated (Pd – O bond distance ¼ 3.359 A) (Fig.5). This is in ˚ contrast to 2 L13 , where chloride ligand does not dissociate and remains bound to the palladium center, while the amine moiety of the 2-aminobiphenyl ligand is displaced by one of the phosphine groups of the BINAP ligand.
That one of the phosphines of BINAP and the 2-amino group are hemilabile in 2 L13 is seen in its 31P NMR spectrum in chloroform, where two rapidly exchanging species (one sharp doublet at 15 ppm (JP – P ¼ 15.3) and a broad singlet at 36 ppm) are observed.
Examining the structures of 6b and 6c , precatalysts of which the analogous cannot be made (Fig.6), the mesylate anion dissociates from palladium, allowing the palladium center to accommodate the very bulky ligands L2 and L3 .
To occupy the fourth coordination site le  vacant by the dissociated mesylate the palladium coordinates to the ipso carbon of the of the triisopropylphenyl ring.
It is likely that 6 can accommodate these larger ligands while 2 cannot due to the inability of the chloride to dissociate from the palladium center while the mesylate anion can.
With a series of mesylate precatalysts 6 in hand, we examined their e ffi ciency in various cross-coupling reactions.
Biaryl phosphine ligand L1 (XPhos) has seen application in a broad range of transition metal-catalyzed C – C and C – N bond forming processes.
To test the utility of XPhos precatalyst 6a , we evaluated its performance in the Suzuki – Miyaura coupling of unstable boronic acids that are extremely prone to protodeboronation.
The success of this coupling process, as reported, was dependent on the extremely fast activation of the XPhos precatalyst of type 2 at room temperature in conjunction with its high level of catalytic activity.
With the analogous XPhos-derived mesylate precatalyst 6e , unstable boronic acids could be coupled with electron-rich, sterically hindered, and heteroaryl chlorides under mild conditions (rt / 40 C) with short reaction times (30 minutes) and in high yields similar to the previously reported results (Table 1).
The t-butyl-substituted version of L1 , L2 (tBuXPhos), has also been utilized in a range of transformations including vinyl tri  uoromethylations, a -arylations, the amination of heteroaryl halides, and arylation of sulfonamides.
In 2008 the a -arylation of t-butyl acetate with aryl halides in the presence of LHMDS and precatalyst 1 with tBuXPhos as the ligand was reported.
Using precatalyst 6b the a -arylation of t-butyl acetate could be achieved in excellent yields employing both aryl and heteroaryl chlorides (Table 2).
Chemical Science Edge Article Palladium-catalyzed C – N coupling reactions are powerful tools in both industry and academia.
Recent work by our group has shown L3 and L4 to be highly e ffi cient supporting ligands for Pd in the coupling of primary amines and secondary amines, respectively.
Novel palladacycle precatalysts 6c and 6d are also extremely effective in the coupling of primary (Table 3) and secondary (Table 4) amines with aryl halides, even at very low catalyst loadings, and display activity comparable to that of the previous generation precatalysts of type 1 and 2 (for L4 ).
As previously stated, precatalysts 6a–6n can be rapidly generated in situ from -OMs dimer 5 and directly used in palladium-catalyzed reactions with activity comparable to that of the isolated precatalysts.
This method could facilitate the expedient determination of optimal conditions for a palladiumcatalyzed reaction.
To evaluate this process, the Suzuki – Miyaura coupling of 4-chloro-3-methylanisole and 2,6-di uorophenylboronic acid was chosen as a model reaction.
As depicted in Table 5, the coupling was examined with SPhos, RuPhos, XPhos and triphenylphosphine as supporting ligands and with the m -Cl, m -OMs, m -OAc dimers, as well as Pd(OAc)2 and Pd2(dba)3 as palladium sources.
Vials of palladium source and ligand were aged for ten minutes in 1 mL of THF and directly added to a reaction tube containing the aryl halide and boronic acid, followed by the addition of base.
The results of this study clearly indicate that XPhos is the optimal ligand for this transformation, with the catalyst based on RuPhos also showing moderate activity.
The m -OMs dimer is optimal as the palladium source, with the chloride and acetate dimers showing some activity.
The use of Pd(OAc)2 and Pd2(dba)3 under these conditions provided little product.
In conclusion we have developed a new series of palladium precatalysts based on the 2-aminobiphenyl mesylate palladacycle 5 .
These precatalysts can be prepared with a broad range of phosphine ligands in a facile and straightforward way and can be activated under mild conditions to generate the desired LPd(0) species.
These precatalysts are all obtained in high yields from common intermediate , which can be synthesized from readily available starting materials in a three-step process, which avoids rigorous Schlenk techniques.
We anticipate that these precatalysts will considerably improve the scope of palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions.
This activity was supported, in part, by an educational donation provided by Amgen for which we are grateful.
We thank the National Institutes of Health for  nancial support (GM46059 and GM58160).
We thank Sigma-Aldrich for a gi  of BrettPhos and Johnson Matthey for a gi of Pd2(dba)3.
We thank Dr Peter Muller for X-ray structural analysis.
We also thank Dr Meredith¨ McGowan for assistance with the preparation of the manuscript and Dr Alex Spokoyny for helpful discussions.
The Varian 300 MHz NMR instrument used for portions of this work was supported by the National Science Foundation (Grants CHE 9808061 and DBI 9729592).
Received 12th March 2012, Accepted 17th April 2012 The regiospecific formation of C–C bonds is a key transformation in organic synthesis.
Transition metal-catalysed crosscoupling reactions are among the most versatile synthetic tools for this purpose.
In these transformations, an electrophilic coupling partner, usually an organohalide or -pseudohalide, oxidatively adds to a metal catalyst with a low oxidation state with formation of an organometallic intermediate in a higher oxidation state.
A nucleophilic coupling partner, usually an organometallic reagent, then transfers its carbon residue to the metal centre via a transmetallation step.
The carbon–carbon bond is then formed via reductive elimination, regenerating the catalyst in its original oxidation state.
In addition to these redox-neutral couplings, oxidative couplings can also be used for C–C bond formation.
In this approach, two carbon nucleophiles, originating from organometallic reagents or formed by a C–H activation step, are coupled with each other in the presence of stoichiometric oxidant.
Finally, various reductive couplings exist in which two carbon electrophiles are coupled with each other in the presence of a stoichiometric reducing agent.
The foundation for the use of carboxylic acids in C–C coupling reactions was laid in 1966 by Nilsson who found that aryl copper species generated via the decarboxylation of 2-nitrobenzoic acid can be trapped with aryl iodides with formation of biaryls.
Within recent years, a rapidly growing number of coupling reactions have been reported that draw on carboxylic acid derivatives as substrates.
They serve to regioselectively form new C–C bonds in the place of the carboxylate carbon, which is liberated in the form of CO or CO2.
The advantage of using carboxylic acids in place of aryl halides or organometallic reagents as substrates is that they are widely available, often with substitution patterns complementary to the latter.
Scheme 1 illustrates how the key intermediates of the above transformations can be accessed from carboxylic acids rather than organohalides or organometallic reagents.
In order to form a carbon–metal bond without increasing the oxidation state of the metal catalyst, carbon dioxide must be extruded from a coordinated carboxylate ion (Scheme 1, Pathway I).
This sequence gives access to catalytic intermediates A comparable to those traditionally generated from organometallic reagents in transmetallation steps.
If the decarboxylation is performed under oxidative conditions (Pathway II), an organometallic intermediate B in an increased oxidation state is formed comparable to those formed via the oxidative addition of carbon electrophiles to metal catalysts.
Redox-neutral decarboxylative reactions allow generating organometallic species with nucleophilic reactivity via the extrusion of carbon dioxide from metal carboxylates.
Such C–C bond activating processes provide a way of employing carboxylate salts as substitutes for the traditional sources of carbon nucleophiles, (ie) stoichiometric organometallic reagents.
If the decarboxylation of carboxylic acids is performed under oxidative conditions, organometallic species with electrophilic reactivity are obtained instead.
These can alternatively be accessed via the extrusion of carbon monoxide from acyl–metal species generated via the oxidative addition of activated carboxylic acid derivatives ((eg) acid chlorides, anhydrides or esters) to metal complexes.
In the latter two reaction types, carboxylic acids thus become substitutes for organohalides.
The complementary redox-neutral and oxidative decarboxylative and decarbonylative reaction modes allow the broad use of carboxylic acids as substrates in C–C bond-forming reactions.
Their applicability, scope and limitations are discussed using the examples of Heck reactions, cross-couplings and direct arylations.
under redox-neutral conditions, followed by extrusion of CO from the resulting acyl–metal species (Pathway III).
These complementary strategies for the generation of aryl– metal species from carboxylic acid derivatives form the basis for an array of synthetic transformations in which carboxylic acid derivatives are used as surrogates for either organometallic reagents, such as Grignard reagents or boronic acids, or for organohalides or -pseudohalides.
This tutorial review sets decarboxylative and decarbonylative coupling strategies into perspective with regard to each other as well as to the established methods of C–C bond formation.
For three representative synthetic transformations, namely Heck reactions, biaryl syntheses and C–H arylations, the prospects and limitations of each strategy are critically discussed.
In standard Heck reactions, aryl halides are coupled with olefins to afford vinyl arenes.
According to the accepted mechanism, the oxidative addition of the aryl halide to Pd results in the formation of a Pd –aryl complex.
Olefin insertion into the Pd–aryl bond followed by b -hydride elimination leads to the desired product.
For an effective turnover, this reaction requires one equivalent of base to trap the hydrogen halide side product, allowing the palladium catalyst to return to the zero oxidation state.
Carboxylates can enter the catalytic cycle of a Heck reaction either via an oxidative decarboxylation process or via a decarbonylative process.
As can be seen in Scheme 2, decarboxylative Heck reactions start directly from the carboxylic acid and involve the stoichiometric use of an oxidant and base.
In contrast, for decarbonylative reactions, it is necessary to replace the OH by a better leaving group.
Thus, known decarbonylative Heck reactions starting (eg) from acid chlorides, anhydrides or active esters, do not require an oxidant, and often proceed even without added base.
Decarboxylative Heck reactions The first decarboxylative Heck reaction was reported by Myers et al. They found that in the presence of catalytic amounts of Pd(O2CCF3)2 and excess Ag2CO3, certain ortho-substituted or heterocyclic carboxylic acids react with olefins with formation of the corresponding vinyl arenes (Scheme 3).
The proposed mechanism of this reaction is depicted in Scheme 4.
In the first step of the catalytic cycle, Pd species a takes up the carboxylate by salt exchange.
Extrusion of CO2 results in the formation of aryl palladium( ) species c.
The following steps, which proceed via species d and e, (ie) insertion of the alkene, b -hydride elimination, and deprotonation, are identical to those in a standard Heck reaction.
However, as in Fujiwara–Moritani arylations, an oxidation step is required to convert the Pd species f back to the initial Pd species a.
The initial protocol was further improved by replacing the expensive silver carbonate, which acts both as the oxidant and the base by para-benzoquinone or oxygen.
In the latter case, electron-rich carboxylic acids could be coupled with methyl acrylate without any additives or base.
Recently a rhodium-catalysed decarboxylative Heck coupling of ortho-ortho-disubstituted benzoic acids with acrylates has been disclosed by Zhao et al. This reaction variant does not require an oxidant as the excess of acrylate serves as the hydride acceptor thus allowing catalytic turnover (Scheme 5).
In decarboxylative Heck reactions, ortho-ortho-disubstituted electron-rich benzoic acids give the best results, while the corresponding electron-rich aryl halides are difficult substrates in traditional Heck reactions.
This complementary substrate preference can be seen as a particular advantage of the decarboxylative reaction variant.
Decarbonylative Heck reactions Blaser and Spencer were the first to report a decarbonylative Heck reaction of aroyl chlorides.
In the first step of the proposed catalytic cycle, the aroyl chloride oxidatively adds to the Pd species a forming a Pd -acyl species b.
Decarbonylation furnishes an aryl palladium( ) species c that enters the Heck reaction cycle (Scheme 6).
In the initial protocol, amines were used to trap the hydrochloric acid byproduct.
Miura et al. reported base-free variants of this reaction using palladium chloride/tetraalkylammonium chloride mixtures or [RhCl(C2H4)]2 as the catalyst (Scheme 7).
In these protocols, the volatile by-products CO and HCl are removed from the reaction mixture in a stream of N2, thus avoiding the formation of salt waste.
Aroyl chlorides are, however, corrosive, difficult to handle and their synthesis from carboxylic acids requires an extra reaction step.
Stephan and de Vries demonstrated that decarbonylative Heck reactions can also be performed starting from acid anhydrides (Scheme 8).
The reaction of benzoic acid anhydrides with alkenes in the presence of a Pd-catalyst leads to the formation of the corresponding vinyl arenes along with CO and benzoic acid.
If a waste-free method for the dehydration of benzoic acid to its anhydride could be found, this approach might open up opportunities for waste-minimized aromatic substitution reactions.
We have demonstrated that decarbonylative Heck reactions are also possible starting directly from carboxylic acid if di-tertbutyl dicarbonate (Boc2O) is added as an activating agent.
Thus, various (hetero)aromatic acids were smoothly converted into the corresponding vinyl arenes in the presence of a PdCl2/LiCl catalyst.
This reaction variant of a decarbonylative coupling can be seen as a direct counterpart to the decarboxylative Heck reaction by Myers.
Its advantages are that it is not limited to ortho-substituted benzoic acids and that only volatile byproducts (CO, CO2 and tert-butanol) are formed as the side products (Scheme 9).
However, the more aggressive reaction conditions somewhat limit its applicability.
4-Nitrophenyl esters are another substrate class that can be used in decarbonylative Heck reactions.
The substrates can easily be generated from aromatic carboxylic acids and nitrophenyl chloroformate.
Alternatively, they can be (re)generated from the carboxylic acid and 4-nitrophenol in the presence of catalytic amounts of a Lewis acid, thus demonstrating the feasibility of waste-minimized Heck processes (Scheme 10, A).
Another way to activate aromatic carboxylic acids for decarbonylative Heck reactions is their addition to propyne with formation of isopropenyl esters.
In the presence of a PdBr/(Bu)3N(BuOH)Br catalyst, the latter can be converted into the corresponding vinyl arenes along with CO and acetone (Scheme 10, B).
In conclusion, the redox-neutral decarbonylative and the decarboxylative reactions with their complementary applicability constitute attractive alternatives to traditional Heck reactions whenever the aromatic carboxylic acids are more available than the corresponding aryl halides.
Carboxylic acids can replace either the nucleophilic reagent or the electrophilic coupling partner in cross-coupling reactions, as illustrated in Scheme 11.
In redox-neutral decarboxylative couplings, they adopt the role of the carbon nucleophile, and in oxidative decarboxylative and redox-neutral decarbonylative couplings, they act as the electrophilic coupling partner.
Transformations in which both coupling partners are replaced by carboxylic acids have also been reported.
Decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions Since their discovery in 2006, redox-neutral decarboxylative cross-couplings with bimetallic catalyst systems have evolved into reliable tools for the synthesis of biaryls.
Their key advantage is that they draw on easily accessible carboxylic acids rather than organometallic reagents as the nucleophilic coupling partner.
Various reaction variants have been developed that allow using aryl iodides, bromides, chlorides, triflates and tosylates as the electrophilic coupling partner.
While couplings of aromatic carboxylates with aryl halides are restricted to orthosubstituted or heterocyclic carboxylates, there is no such limitation for their couplings with triflates and tosylates (Scheme 12).
When using such bimetallic catalyst systems, the decarboxylation step takes place within the coordination sphere of a copperor silver-based catalyst a.
The resulting organometallic intermediate c then transfers its aryl group to an aryl-Pd species f generated via oxidative addition of the aryl electrophile to a coordinatively unsaturated Pd -based cross-coupling catalyst e (Scheme 13).
This bimetallic approach allows separate tuning of the catalysts for the decarboxylation and coupling steps, and thus covers the broadest range of substrate combinations.
For certain classes of carboxylic acids, the decarboxylation and C–C bond formation can be promoted by the same metal.
Nilsson’s copper mediated coupling of 2-nitrobenzoic acid with aryl iodides and Steglich’s palladium-mediated synthesis of Lamellarin set the stage for the development of monometallic catalytic systems.
Steglich called his coupling reaction a ‘‘Heck cyclization’’, which seems to imply that the decarboxylation occurs after the actual C–C bond forming step.
Forgione and Bilodeau reported an intermolecular catalytic variant of this reaction, in which certain heteroaromatic carboxylic acids were decarboxylatively coupled with aryl bromides using a monometallic palladium catalyst.
They have outlined three alternative mechanistic pathways for this transformation, but it is not yet clear which of them is predominant.
Their coupling strategy has been extended (eg) to ortho-ortho-disubstituted benzoates.
Certain fluorinated benzoates can be decarboxylatively coupled also with monometallic copper complexes, presumably via a Cu –Cu cycle (Scheme 14).
Overall, decarboxylative cross-couplings have become a true alternative to cross-couplings using organometallic reagents for regiospecific C–C bond formation.
Their key advantage arises from the broad availability of carboxylic acids in comparison to organometallic reagents: more than 40 000 carboxylic but only 3 000 boronic acids are commercially available.
Some decarboxylative cross-couplings do not even have a direct counterpart based on organometallic reagents.
For example, a -oxocarboxylic acids, a -iminocarboxylic acids and oxalic acid monoesters can be coupled with aryl halides to give the corresponding ketones, azomethines or esters, respectively (Scheme 15).
A remaining challenge in the development of decarboxylative couplings is to reduce the reaction temperatures, which currently often exceed 120 C.
Oxidative decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions Oxidative decarboxylative couplings allow the coupling of carboxylic acids with organometallic reagents.
An example of this reaction type is the palladium-catalysed biaryl synthesis from ortho-substituted (hetero)arenecarboxylic acids and arylboronic esters using silver carbonate as the oxidant (Scheme 16).
This synthetic strategy is rather costly, but a useful alternative to Suzuki couplings whenever the carboxylic acid starting materials are more easily available than the corresponding aryl halides.
There are also a few examples of C–C bond-forming reactions in which carboxylic acids replace both the nucleophilic and electrophilic coupling partners.
Various ortho-substituted benzoic acids undergo Pd-catalysed oxidative homocoupling with formation of symmetrical biaryls using stoichiometric amounts of silver as the oxidant and decarboxylation mediator.
This reaction mode may also be used to generate predominantly unsymmetrical coupling products for some substrate combinations.
Thus, the reaction of ortho-ortho-disubstituted carboxylic acids with 2-nitrobenzoic acids in the presence of PdCl2, PPh3 and Ag2CO3 affords the corresponding biaryls in reasonable selectivities and yields of up to 79% (Scheme 17).
Decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions In principle, the decarbonylative cross-coupling of activated carboxylic acids with organometallic reagents may become an alternative to the above oxidative decarboxylative couplings.
However, reports of such transformations are rare.
In the only catalytic reaction variant, aromatic anhydrides are coupled with aryl boroxines to give the corresponding unsymmetrical biaryls with release of CO (Scheme 18).
While this proves the feasibility of such catalytic decarbonylative cross-couplings, the practical utility of the prototype protocol is limited because the anhydride cannot yet be generated in situ from the carboxylic acid, so that one half of the carboxylate substrate serves as a leaving group.
Decarbonylative transformations using stoichiometric amounts of nickel have been investigated in more detail.
Based on pioneering work by Trost, Rovis et al. have disclosed the enantioselective reaction of cyclic anhydrides with alkyl- and aryl-zinc reagents, leading to g -substituted carboxylic acids.
A related approach has recently been used for the synthesis of ortho-alkylated and arylated benzamides from phthalimides (Scheme 19).
While practical applications are still in their infancy, the synthetic potential of decarbonylative cross-couplings is clearly visible.
The key challenge at this stage lies in facilitating the release of CO from the metal mediator, which would open up opportunities for more generally applicable decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions using the mediator in only catalytic amounts.
Carboxylic acids can also be used as substrates for arylations with C–H activation.
Once again, the aryl electrophiles may be generated alternatively by oxidative decarboxylative or redoxneutral decarbonylative processes (Scheme 20).
Decarboxylative arylation with C–H activation The redox-neutral activation of aromatic C–H bonds and of carboxylic acids by transition metal catalysts would each give rise to aryl nucleophiles.
In order to achieve a process in which these two substrates types are cross-coupled, an oxidation step needs to be incorporated into the catalytic cycle.
The first examples of such oxidative decarboxylative C–H arylations were reported by Crabtree et al. , who combined a Pd-catalyst with Ag2CO3 to synthesize unsymmetrical biaryls from certain aromatic carboxylic acids and arenes (Scheme 21, A).
This approach proved to be particularly useful for intramolecular couplings of 2-phenoxybenzoic acids, in which only one C–H bond is within the reach of the metal centre (Scheme 21, B).
Other groups have applied this strategy to the coupling of ortho-substituted benzoic acids with heteroaromatic compounds or with polyfluorobenzenes (Scheme 21, C and D).
These oxidative couplings most likely proceed via a bimetallic mechanism in which silver or copper carbonates mediate the decarboxylation step, while the C–H activation and C–C coupling steps proceed at the Pd centre (Scheme 22).
In addition, Ag2CO3 reoxidises the Pd species e formed after the reductive elimination of the product and acts as a base to trap the proton formed in the C–H activating step.
In decarboxylative couplings of oxazole- or thiazole-carboxylic acids with oxazoles, copper( ) carbonate has been used in place of silver as the stoichiometric oxidant and base (Scheme 21, E).
Beside (hetero)aromatic carboxylates, a -oxocarboxylates can also be used as the coupling partners.
The Pd-catalysed oxidative coupling of a -oxocarboxylates with acetanilides to form arylketones is unique in that the decarboxylation step proceeds already at room temperature (Scheme 23).
This example demonstrates that decarboxylative couplings are not restricted to hightemperature conditions.
Decarbonylative arylation with C–H activation The direct counterparts to these oxidative decarboxylative couplings are decarbonylative C–H arylations starting from activated carboxylates.
The few known examples use rhodium( ) catalysts, and the C–H activation is directed by pyridyl substituents (Scheme 24).
Aroyl chlorides or benzoic anhydrides are employed as sources of the aryl residue.
After oxidative addition to Rh , the acyl intermediates provide the aryl electrophiles by extrusion of CO above 140 C.
The key advantage of this coupling strategy is that no stoichiometric oxidant is required.
However, decarbonylative processes published to date still require activating the carboxylic acids in an extra reaction step.
If methods could be identified that permit the in situ activation of the carboxylic acids, this reaction concept could become an efficient alternative to C–H arylations starting from aryl halides as well as to oxidative C–H arylations starting from organometallic reagents or carboxylate salts.
In the context of their application in Heck reactions, crosscouplings and arylations with C–H activation, it has been shown how decarboxylative and decarbonylative couplings complement each other, providing a powerful toolbox for the use of carboxylic acids as versatile starting materials for the regioselective construction of C–C bonds.
A similar dualism of decarboxylative and decarbonylative couplings can also be formulated for other types of coupling reactions, (eg) additions across multiple bonds, eliminations, and carbon-heteroatom bond-forming reactions.
Scheme 25 shows how these strategies for the ipso-substitution of carboxylate groups may be integrated into an overall concept that allows the regiospecific synthesis of arenes with various substitution patterns.
The fact that alkyl groups, which direct a second substituent into the ortho/para-positions, can be converted into meta-directing carboxylate groups by a simple oxidation step enhances the synthetic utility of carboxylic acids.
Moreover, carboxylate groups can be utilized to direct C–H functionalisations selectively into their ortho-position.
After ortho-functionalisation, the carboxylate group is still available for ipso-substitution, or can be removed by proto- decarboxylation.
By the optimal combination of oxidation, ortho- and ipso-substitution, any desired product isomer thus becomes accessible regioselectively.
The rapidly evolving network of carboxylic acid-based transformations provides attractive alternatives to established, often unselective methods for the functionalization of arenes.
It will be interesting to see which new opportunities for decarboxylative and decarbonylative processes will emerge in the coming years.
We thank the DFG (SFB/TRR-88, ‘‘3MET’’), Nanokat and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (fellowship to W.I.D.) for financial support.
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
MS received 24 October 2010; revised 13 January 2011; accepted 11 April 2011 For correspondence # This paper is dedicated to Professor Habib Firouzabadi on the occasion of his 68th birthday (a) (b) Heck reactions and related chemistry, referring to C – C bond formations between aryl halides or tri  ates with ole  ns, occupy a special place among the transition metal-catalyzed transformations.
Given that the selective installation a halide or OTf usually requires several steps, the oxidative Heck reaction, transition-metal-catalyzed ole  nation of aryl C – H bonds, no longer needs the prior functionalization, is even more atom economic and versatile.
As pioneered by Fujiwara and Moritani, the Pd-catalyzed C – H bond activation and oxidative ole  nation have made great advances [eqn (1)].
Yu and co-workers realized the weakly coordinating groups directed C – H ole  nation and employed amino acid ligands to enable the reactivity and selectivity.
Matsumoto started to use [Cp * RhCl2]2 to catalyze the oxidative Heck reaction in 2000.
Since then, Miura, Ellman, Glorius, and Rovis et al. have made great contributions to Rh-catalyzed oxidative ole  nation.
In parallel, Ru( ) catalysts have also allowed the oxidative coupling of aryl and alkenyl C – H bonds with ole  ns.
Among these, the corresponding cyclic products could be achieved in one step by 1,4addition or oxidative cyclization [eqn (2)].
Though those transformations have been extensively utilized in organic synthesis, a main restrictive limitation was that the ole  ns were usually limited to electronically biased ole  ns, such as a styrene or an a , b -unsaturated carbonyl.
Herein, we report the Rh( )-catalyzed (hetero)arenes C – H bond oxidative alkylation with electronically nonbiased allylic alcohols to afford the functional b -aryl ketones, and carboamination of the allylic alcohols with acetanilides to obtain 1,2- disubstituted indolines [eqn (3)].
Moreover, we also refer to the alternative C – H bond alkylations, for instance, hydroarylations of alkenes as well as direct alkylations with alkyl halides.
Our investigation was initiated by using the reaction of N,N-dimethylbenzamide ( 1a ) with but-3-en-2-ol ( 2a ) as a model system (Table 1).
First, when 1a and 2a were treated with [Cp * RhCl2]2 (2 mol%) in t-BuOH (5 mL) using Cu(OAc)2 as the oxidant at 120 C for 16 h, a trace amount of desired product can be detected (entry 1).
Next, we found that in the presence of AgSbF6 (10 mol%) the transformation gave a reasonable yield of product 3a (entry 2).
Fortunately, 2 equiv. of Cu(OAc)2 H2O was the most suitable oxidant for this reaction (entries 3 6).
Meanwhile, a decrease of the yield was observed by decreasing the amount of AgSbF6 or adding 0.5 mL H2O (entries 7 and 8).
Various solvents were also tested (entries 9 and 10), and t-BuOH was proved to be optimal.
of different N,N-disubstituted benzamides was investigated (Table 2).
A series of para-substituted N,N-dimethylbenzamides were converted to the corresponding products in good to excellent yields (Table 2, 3b–f ).
Importantly, halide functional groups, such as F, Cl, Br, I, were tolerated in this transformation.
It was worth noting that the oxidative alkylation occurred selectively in para-position of the functional group, no matter if it was electron-withdrawing ( 3g and h ) or electron-donating ( 3i ).
This was consistent with reported Rh- – H activation, in which the C – C bonds formed only catalyzed C A substrate having a MeO Chemical Science Edge Article Under the optimized reaction conditions, the reactivity at the less sterically hindered site.
group underwent the reaction to afford two regioisomeric products in 2 : 1 ratio ( 3j ).
Due to the coordination of OMe group, the main product of C – H alkylation occurred at the more sterically hindered site.
Other substituted benzamides were also good substrates for this transformation Edge Article Chemical Science and afforded the corresponding products ( 3k–n ) in high yields.
Gratifyingly, the oxidative alkylation of heteroarenes, such as furan, thiophene and pyridine, also proceeded smoothly ( 3o–q ).
Encouraged by these promising results, we further applied these Rh-catalyzed oxidative alkylation conditions to aromatic rings containing different directing groups and allylic alcohols (Table 3).
Both N,N-dialkyl substituted benzamides and N,N-diallyl substituted benzamide reacted with but-3-en-2-ol under the standard conditions to a ord the coupling products To highlight the utility of the synthetic strategy for functional b -aryl ketones, we successfully scaled the reaction to 18 mmol, and obtained 3.36 g 3t a  er 48 h at 120 C using 2 mol% of [Cp RhCl2]2 catalyst precursor [eqn (4)].
To gain more insight to the mechanism of these reactions, we performed deuterium competition experiment between substrate 1t and [D5]- and observed a kinetic isotope effect (KIE) of kH/kD z 2.2 [eqn (5)] (see ESI † ), which indicated that the C – H activation of arenes was the rate-determining step.
in good yields (Table 3, 3r–u ).
Similarly, N-benzoylmorpholine and N-benzoylpyrrolidine were also suitable substrates for this transformation (Table 3, 3w and x ).
Subsequently, a series of N,N-disubstituted benzamides were again used to react with pent-1-en-3-ol (Table 3, 3v–y ).
Gratifyingly, various allylic alcohols could be converted to the corresponding functional b -aryl ketones in good yields (Table 3, 3z–ad ).
Finally, the frequently used directing groups, such as pyridine, pyrazole and NHAc, in a common strategy adopted for transition-metal catalyzed C – H activation reaction, could also promote this Rh-catalyzed oxidative alkylation of C – H bonds (Table 3, 3af–ah ).
To our surprise, when allyl alcohol and acetanilides were used as the coupling partners in MeOH, the 1,2-disubstituted indulines were the main products (Table 4, for details see ESI † ) and a series of indulines were synthesized through the carboamination of the alkenes (Table 4, 4a–f ).
Those results indicated that this type of reaction was tolerant toward halide functional groups, electronic and steric effects of the aromatic ring.
When 3-methoxyprop-1-ene was used instead of allyl alcohol, the same product was obtained in 38% yield (Table 4, 4a ).
A tentative mechanism for the Rh-catalyzed intermolecular oxidative alkylation of inactivated arenes with allylic alcohols is proposed on the basis of the above-mentioned results (Scheme 1).
Under the assistance of directing groups, the intermediate A is formed through Rh-catalyzed ortho C(sp2) – H activation, and then coordinates with an ole  n.
This intermediate undergoes 1,2-migratory insertion to generate intermediates B and C .
In the le  path, the MeO in ole  n and the directing group in arene can potentially chelate the Rh to suppress the b -H elimination.
Subsequently, the indoline is formed via C(sp3) – N bond reductive elimination.
While in the right path, selective b -H elimination occurs followed by an enol isomerization.
Finally, RhIII active species is regenerated by the oxidation with Cu(OAc)2 H2O.
Chemical Science Edge Article In summary, we have developed a novel method to achieve the direct ortho oxidative alkylation of N,N-disubstituted aryl amides and oxidative cyclization of acetanilides with allylic alcohols.
This methodology is attractive since the materials are easily prepared while the corresponding products show potential bioactivity.
The versatility of the directing groups, the excellent tolerance of functional groups, and the high levels of regioselectivity should lead to many applications, especially in natural product total synthesis.
The catalytic cycle involves oxidative addition of the aryl halide, alkene insertion, and a novel C(sp )–I reductive elimination.
The C(sp )–I reductive elimination leads to a weakly bonded Pd–product complex, which undergoes ligand exchange via a dissociative mechanism to regenerate the catalyst.
In the rate-determining reductive elimination step, bromides and chlorides have higher barriers than iodides, because the stronger Pd–Br and Pd–Cl bonds are being cleaved in these transition states.
Bulky ligands, such as P(t-Bu)3 and Q-Phos, facilitate the C(sp )–I reductive elimination by preventing the formation of tetracoordinated intermediates.
The mechanism of the competing b -hydrogen elimination pathway was also investigated.
For reactions involving a syn- b hydrogen atom in the alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediate, b -hydrogen elimination is much more favorable, leading to Heck-type side products.
Blocking b -elimination by the choice of substrates is the main reason why this example of carboiodination works.
Transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are a powerful tool in organic synthesis to generate new carbon– carbon and carbon–heteroatom bonds.
Palladium is the most commonly used transition-metal in cross-coupling reactions because of its ability to catalyze multiple redox reactions, and its high functional group tolerance.
Oxidative addition with Pd(0) and reductive elimination from Pd( ) species are two fundamental steps that occur in most Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions.
Previous theoretical and experimental studies have provided a thorough understanding of oxidative addition of aryl halides, the initial step in Pd(0)-catalyzed coupling reactions, for examples, Mizoroki–Heck, Suzuki–Miyaura, Negishi, Sonogashira, Stille, and Kumada couplings.
The electronic and steric effects of ligands and the origins of different reactivities of aryl halides have been of special interest in these studies since these factors are crucial for the efficiency, scope, and selectivity of the coupling reactions.
In contrast to the numerous reports on the oxidative addition of aryl halides and alkyl halides to Pd(0), the opposite reaction—aryl halide reductive elimination from Pd( )—is rare, due to the high endothermicity of this process.
Only a few examples of aryl halide reductive elimination have been reported recently by the Buchwald, Hartwig, and Lautens groups, all employing bulky and electron-rich ligands such as P(t-Bu)3.
ligand (Q-Phos or P(t-Bu)3) is required as in previous reports of carbon-halide reductive eliminations.
The analogous reactions with aryl bromide or chloride starting materials are highly inefficient, giving only trace quantities of carbohalogenation product (Scheme 1c).
With a KI additive, aryl bromides undergo halogen exchange and carboiodination products were obtained with high yield (Scheme 1d).
This suggests that oxidative addition with both aryl bromide and aryl iodide can occur, but Recently, the Lautens group reported a novel Pd(0)-catalyzed carboiodination reaction of alkenes with aryl iodides, which generates a new carbon–carbon bond and a carbon–iodine bond without the formation of stoichiometric waste (Scheme 1a).
A Pd-catalyzed carboiodination reaction of alkenes with vinyl iodides was also reported by Tong et al. , employing 1,10-bis(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene (DPPF) as the ligand.
However, this process requires higher temperatures and greater catalyst loading (Scheme 1b).
The proposed mechanism of carboiodination of aryl iodide 2 involves oxidative addition of the aryl iodide, alkene insertion to the Pd–Ar bond, and finally a novel alkyl– iodide reductive elimination from a Pd( ) intermediate (Scheme 2).
In this reaction, an exceptionally bulky phosphine alkyl–Br reductive elimination is much less favorable than alkyl– I reductive elimination.
For reactions involving a syn- b hydrogen atom in the proposed intermediate after alkene insertion (8), olefin isomerization or Heck-type side products are formed.
These intriguing experimental results prompted us to perform computational studies to investigate the mechanism, origins of different reactivities of aryl halides, and the competing pathways of this novel reaction.
Kinetic studies by Hartwig on the Ar–X reductive elimination from arylpalladium( ) halides with P(t-Bu)3 ligand suggested that the reductive elimination of aryl halide is a complex process involving a reversible reductive elimination to form the monoligated Pd[P(t-Bu)3] complex followed by coordination of P(t-Bu)3 to regenerate the Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 catalyst.
Reactivity in aryl halide reductive elimination is controlled by both kinetic and thermodynamic effects.
In the alkyl halide reductive elimination, little is known about the detailed mechanism or factors that control the rates of the elimination of different alkyl halides.
In contrast to the low reactivity of the aryl iodide reductive elimination in previous reports by Hartwig, Buchwald, and Lautens, only alkyl iodide reductive elimination is productive among all halides in alkene carbohalogenation.
This suggests that a different mechanism may be operative in alkyl iodide reductive elimination.
Here we report the first theoretical study of the mechanism of Pd-catalyzed alkene carbohalogenation of aryl halides.
Full catalytic cycles, the effects of ligands on the mechanisms, and factors that control reactivities of C–X reductive elimination were established for the first time by theoretical studies.
Several possible pathways of the C–X reductive elimination and subsequent ligand exchange steps were investigated, and a dissociative mechanism was found to be the most favorable when P(t-Bu)3 is used as the ligand.
Steric and electronic effects of the ligands on the C–X reductive elimination have been examined and provide an explanation of the high activity of bulky phosphine ligands in this fundamental step.
The origins of the different reactivities between aryl iodides and aryl bromides/chlorides were analyzed and attributed to the different strength of the Pd–X bond in the alkyl palladium( ) halide intermediates.
We have also performed calculations on the competitive b -hydrogen elimination pathway, and we have achieved good agreement with the reactivity observed experimentally in the reactions involving syn- b -hydrogens.
Our theoretical studies, especially the analysis of effects of ligands and the controlling factors of the C–X reductive elimination, provide a detailed understanding of this important process and should aid the design of more efficient ligands and catalytic transformations with broader scope.
The BP86 density functional, which can give accurate geometric and energetic results for transition metals, was used in the geometry optimizations and frequency calculations.
A mixed basis set employing SDD for palladium, iodine and bromine, and 6-31+G(d) for other atoms was used.
Solvent effects were calculated by single point calculations on the gas-phase optimized geometries with the conductor-like polarizable continuum model (CPCM).
Toluene solvent was used in the CPCM calculations.
The nature of all stationary points was examined by the number of imaginary frequencies: zero for minima, and one for transition states.
All energies given below are Gibbs free energies and enthalpies at 298 K in toluene solution.
All calculations were performed with Gaussian 09.1.
The mechanism of Pd(0)-catalyzed intramolecular carbohalogenation of alkene with aryl halides The proposed catalytic cycle of Pd(0)-catalyzed alkene carbohalogenation with aryl halide 2 is shown in Scheme 2.
Initially, aryl halide 2 binds with the Pd(0) catalyst and one phosphine ligand is eliminated to form an h complex 3.
Then, the oxidative addition of aryl halide takes place via transition state 4-ts to form an aryl Pd( ) halide intermediate 5.
Isomerization allows the alkene to coordinate with palladium and then insert into the Pd–Ar bond via transition state 7-ts to form a new carbon–carbon bond in alkyl Pd( ) halide intermediate 8.
The reductive elimination occurs via transition state 9-ts, and generates a new C–X bond.
A coordinative complex of the alkyl halide product 10 is formed after the reductive elimination.
The X / Pd coordination is weak, and complex 10 readily liberates the product 11 and binds with one phosphine ligand to regenerate catalyst 1.
Fig. 1 shows the free energy profiles of the preferred mechanism in reactions with aryl iodide 2a (the blue line), aryl bromide 2b (the red line), and aryl chloride 2c (the green line).
Tri-tertbutylphosphine (P(t-Bu)3) is used as the ligand in the computation.
Except for the catalyst Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2, all species in Fig.1 are mono-ligated. Previous theoretical studies suggested that the mono-ligated pathway is favored in the oxidative addition with bulky monodentate phosphine ligands.
In this study, we have found that monophosphine species are also favored in the reductive elimination with bulky ligands (vide infra).
In the reaction with aryl iodide 2a, ligand exchange to liberate one P(t-Bu)3 ligand and form complex 3 requires 10.1 kcal mol free energy, because the coordination of P(t-Bu)3 with Pd is much stronger than the Pd–aryl binding in complex 3.
The detailed mechanism of formation of the Pd-substrate p complex 3 has been investigated by kinetic studies by Hartwig and computational study by Harvey and Fey.
An associative displacement mechanism was found favorable with P(t-Bu)3 ligand.
The subsequent oxidative addition transition state with aryl iodide could not be located in the geometry optimizations; however, we speculate that the energy of 4a-ts is lower than 18.3 kcal mol according to the energies of 4b-ts and 4c-ts and previously determined trends in aryl halide reactivity.
Previous studies on the transition state of aryl iodide oxidative addition using B3LYP calculations were also unsuccessful.
The oxidative addition of aryl iodide leads to an aryl Pd( ) iodide intermediate 5a.
The formation of 5a is exergonic by 7.2 kcal mol compared to Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2.
Complex 5a is tricoordinated with a T-shaped geometry, consistent with previous theoretical studies and crystal structures of similar aryl Pd(II) halide species.
The tetracoordinated complex 6a is an isomer of 5a in which the C ] C double bond coordinates with palladium.
The Gibbs free energy of 6a is 13.6 kcal mol higher than that of 5a due to the strong steric repulsions between the exceptionally bulky P(t-Bu)3 ligand and the iodine atom.
The alkene insertion to the Pd–Ar bond via a four-centered transition state 7a-ts gives a tricoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediate 8a.
The alkene insertion requires an overall activation energy of 24.8 kcal mol with respect to intermediate 5a.
The alkene insertion step (5a / 8a) involves transformation of a p bond to a new C–C s bond, and is exergonic by 10.0 kcal mol .
It serves as an important driving force in the catalytic cycle.
Several mechanisms are possible for the subsequent reductive elimination step.
Due to the extreme bulkiness of the P(t-Bu)3 ligand, reductive elimination involving bisphosphine complexes is not possible and the corresponding transition states were not found.
Thus, the reductive elimination from the tricoordinated intermediate 8a occurs via transition state 9a-ts.
The barrier of the reductive elimination is 24.9 kcal mol , slightly higher than that of the alkene insertion step.
Transition state 9a-ts is the turnover-determining step in the whole catalytic cycle.
The high activation energy of alkyl–I reductive elimination is related to the endothermicity of this transformation.
The reductive elimination transition state 9a-ts leads to a Pd-product complex 10a, in which the iodine atom is weakly coordinated with the palladium.
Complex 10a is 15.3 kcal mol less stable than the alkyl Pd( ) iodide 8a.
In comparison, C–C and C–N reductive eliminations from Pd( ) complexes are much more exothermic and require much lower barriers.
The possible mechanisms for the ligand exchange with product complex 10a to regenerate the catalyst 1 are summarized in Scheme 3.
The dissociative mechanism (path A) involves dissociation of the alkyl halide 11a from complex 10a to form a monoligated Pd(0) complex 12, which associates with one P(t-Bu)3 molecule to regenerate the catalyst Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 (1).
The associative replacement mechanism (path B) involves a concerted replacement of the alkyl halide 10a with P(t-Bu)3 via a threecentered transition state 13-ts.
(It is called associative replacement by McMullin et al. ) The associative mechanism (path C) involves a stepwise displacement of the alkyl halide via a tricoordinated Pd(0) intermediate 14.
The intermediates and transition states involved in the different pathways of reductive elimination of alkyl iodide 11a were calculated, and the results are summarized in Fig.2.
All three pathways involve the same three-centered reductive elimination transition state 9a-ts, with an activation barrier of 24.9 kcal mol with respect to the alkyl Pd( ) iodide complex 8a.
The reductive elimination leads directly to a product–Pd complex 10a, in which the Pd is bound to the iodine atom in the product.
We assume the barrier of product dissociation from 10a to form 12 equals to the energy of 12, (ie) the reverse process, binding of 12 with 11a, is barrierless.
The monocoordinated complex 12 is only 4.6 kcal mol less stable than 10a in terms of Gibbs free energies.
This suggests that the coordination of the iodine with Pd is not very strong in complex 10a, even though the Pd only has 14 d electrons.
The mono-ligated Pd(0) complex 12 readily undergoes coordination with another P(t-Bu)3 molecule and forms complex 1.
The rate-determining step in the reductive elimination process is the three-centered alkyl halide reductive elimination transition state 9a-ts.
The ligand replacement transition state in Path B (13-ts) adopts trigonal planar geometry, and requires an activation energy of 32.9 kcal mol with respect to complex 8a (Fig.5).
This is much higher than the barrier in Path A and the reductive elimination transition state 9a-ts.
The tricoordinated intermediate 14 (Path C) could not be located by geometry optimizations.
Due to the extremely large cone angle of P(t-Bu)3 (182), tri- or tetracoordinated Pd complexes with two P(t-Bu)3 ligands are rarely observed.
With potentially shorter P–Pd and I–Pd distances than in 13-ts, 14 is expected to be even more crowded than the ligand replacement transition state 13-ts, and thus has even higher energies, if it exists at all.
Thus, the dissociative mechanism (Path A) is predicted to be favored for reductive elimination of alkyl halides.
The transformation from 8a to 10a is endergonic by 15.3 kcal mol .
This is compensated by the highly exothermic ligand exchange process, which liberates the weakly bound product 11a from 10a and regenerates the Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 complex.
Similar effects of the bulky P(t-Bu)3 ligand to promote aryl halide reductive elimination by forming Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 complex 1 have been reported previously.
The overall reductive elimination process from the alkyl Pd( ) iodide 8a to Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 1 is slightly exergonic by 1.2 kcal mol .
The whole catalytic cycle of the reaction with aryl iodide 2a is exothermic by 18.4 kcal mol .
The main driving force of the reaction is the transformation of one C ] C p bond to one C–C s bond.
2. Origins of different reactivities of aryl halides in the ratedetermining C–X reductive elimination step The full catalytic cycles of the reactions of aryl bromide 2b and aryl chloride 2c using Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2 catalyst were computed to investigate why the chloride and bromide showed poor experimental reactivity.
The free energy profiles are shown in Fig.1. The activation barriers of the oxidative addition of aryl bromide and aryl chloride are 18.3 and 21.1 kcal mol , respectively.
Although we cannot locate the oxidative addition transition state for the reaction with aryl iodine 2a, the barrier of Ar–I oxidative addition is expected to be lower than those of Ar–Br and Ar–Cl, based on previous theoretical studies with other phosphine ligands.
The different reactivities of aryl halides in oxidative additions are usually attributed to the strengths of the Ar–X bonds.
The reactions to form aryl Pd(II) halides are exergonic.
The Ar–Pd( )–X intermediates 5a, 5b, 5c are 7.2, 5.7, and 3.6 kcal mol more stable respectively than the separated catalyst Pd[(t-Bu)3]2 and the substrate.
Subsequent alkene insertions from the aryl Pd( ) halides require 23.5 and 22.6 kcal mol activation energies for the reactions with aryl bromide 2b and aryl chloride 2c, respectively.
These barriers are both slightly lower than the alkene insertion in the reaction of aryl iodide 2a ( D G ¼ 24.8 kcal mol ).
Greater steric repulsions between the halide and the bulky ligand are observed in the transition states with iodide, leading to the higher barrier of 7a-ts.
The optimized geometries of 7a-ts, 7b-ts, and 7c-ts are shown in Fig.3.
Similar to the alkyl–I reductive elimination, the dissociative mechanism (Pathway A in Scheme 3) is predicted to be favored for the alkyl–Br and alkyl–Cl reductive elimination with bromide 2b and chloride 2c.
The monoligated PdP(t-Bu)3 complex 12 is 8.5 and 8.9 kcal mol more stable than the alkyl–X reductive elimination transitions states 9b-ts and 9c-ts, respectively.
For the reactions with all three halides, the rate-determining step is the alkyl–X reductive elimination.
The activation barriers of the alkyl–Br and alkyl–Cl reductive eliminations (9b-ts and 9c-ts) are 27.4 and 27.9 kcal mol , respectively, both higher than the alkyl–I reductive elimination transition state 9a-ts ( D G ¼ 24.9 kcal mol ).
The predicted activation barriers of the alkyl–X reductive elimination are in good agreement with the observed reactivities of the different aryl halide substrates 2a–c.
The reductive elimination of alkyl–Br and alkyl–Cl (8b / 1 and 8c / 1, respectively) are both slightly more exergonic than the reductive elimination of alkyl–I (8b / 1).
This suggests that the different reactivities of halides in the alkyl–X reductive elimination are not a result of thermodynamic control.
The optimized geometries of the alkyl–X reductive elimination transition states 9a-ts, 9b-ts, and 9c-ts are shown in Fig.3. These structures clearly show that there are no steric repulsions between the mono-ligated phosphine ligand and the substrate in the reductive elimination transition states.
The differences of the reductive elimination barriers are attributed to the different bond dissociation energies of the Pd–X bond.
The alkyl–X reductive elimination involves cleavages of the Pd–C and Pd–X bonds and formation of C–X bonds.
To investigate the origins of the differences of reactivities of halides in alkyl–X reductive elimination, the bond dissociation energies (BDEs) of the Pd–X and Pd–C bonds in alkyl Pd( ) halides 8a–c and the C–X bonds in the alkyl halide products 11a–c were calculated and the results are shown in Scheme 4.
The BDE of the Pd–I bond in 8a is 8.3 kcal mol lower than that of the Pd–Br bond in 8b, and 19.1 kcal mol lower than that of the Pd–Cl bond in 8c.
The BDEs of the Pd–alkyl bonds in the three intermediates are similar and much lower than the BDEs of the Pd–X bonds.
This suggests that the energy required to break the Pd–X bond determines the different reactivities of alkyl Pd( ) halides in reductive elimination.
The barriers of reductive elimination are also affected by the strengths of the forming C–X bonds, although these effects are smaller than those of the breaking Pd–X bonds.
The forming C–I bond is 9.3 kcal mol weaker than the forming C–Br bond, and the C–Br bond is 16.0 kcal mol weaker than the C–Cl bond.
Thus, the interaction energies between the alkyl and iodide groups in 9a-ts are weaker than the interaction energies between the alkyl and halide groups in 9b-ts and 9c-ts.
This diminishes the effects of different distortion energies of the breaking Pd–X bonds.
The C–Br reductive elimination requires a 2.5 kcal mol higher activation energy than the C–I reductive elimination.
This difference is much smaller than the differences between the BDE of Pd–Br and Pd–I bonds ( D BDE ¼ 8.3 kcal mol ).
The C–Cl reductive elimination requires only slightly higher barrier than the C–Br reductive elimination, due to the stability of the forming C–Cl bond.
3. Effects of ligands on the activation barriers of C–X reductive elimination The steric and electronic properties of the ligands have significant effects on the reactivities of alkyl–X reductive elimination.
Only exceptionally bulky and electron-rich ligands such as P(t-Bu)3 and Q-Phos are productive in the carboiodination with aryl iodides.
In the carboiodination of vinyl iodides, bidentate ligands with larger bite angle were more reactive.
We have calculated the reactivities of alkyl–X reductive elimination with different monodentate ligands to understand the steric and electronic effects of the ligands.
We calculated the full catalytic cycle using PMe3 to investigate if a smaller ligand will lead to an alternative mechanism or a different rate-determining step.
The potential energy profile of the alkene carboiodination of aryl iodide 2a with PMe3 is shown in Fig.4. We could not locate the Ar–I oxidative addition transition state 4d-ts in the geometry optimizations.
The oxidative addition barriers via the mono- and bisphosphine pathways are expected to be similar when a smaller PMe3 ligand is used.
The oxidative addition via mono- and bisphosphine pathways lead to aryl Pd( ) iodide complexes 5d and 16d, respectively.
The activation free energy of the bisphosphine pathway is 18.9 kcal mol via transition state 15d-ts.
The tetracoordinated complex 16d is much more stable than the tricoordinated 5d.
Another tetracoordinated complex 6d, in which the alkenyl group is coordinated to the Pd, is also more stable than 5d.
This is in contrast to the aryl Pd( ) iodide complex with P(t-Bu)3 ligand, in which the tetracoordinated complex 6a is 13.6 kcal mol less stable than the tricoordinated 5a.
The size of ligand has small effects on the alkene insertion barriers.
The alkene insertion transition state with PMe3 ligand (7d-ts) requires an activation energy of 23.8 kcal mol with respect to 16d, almost identical to that with the P( t-Bu)3 ligand (5a / 7a-ts D G ¼ 24.8 kcal mol ).
The alkene insertion transition state 7d-ts leads to a tricoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediate 8d (Fig.5). Similar to the aryl Pd( ) iodide intermediates, formation of tetracoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediates is favored with the PMe3 ligand.
Complex 17d, in which the phenyl group binds to the Pd in an h fashion, is 5.3 kcal mol more stable than its isomer 8d.
The bisphosphine alkyl Pd( ) iodide complex 18d is 10.0 kcal mol more stable than 8d in terms of free energies.
The formation of the tetracoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediates leads to a much stable resting state and dramatically increases the barrier of reductive elimination.
The activation barrier of reductive elimination with PMe3 ligand is 37.0 kcal mol (18d / 9d-ts).
This suggests that the alkyl–I reductive elimination cannot occur with the PMe3 ligand.
The bisphosphine reductive elimination transition state has also been calculated.
The activation barrier of reductive elimination with two PMe3 ligands is 38.8 kcal mol (18d / 9d-ts), which is slightly higher than the monophosphine pathway.
The high barrier of the bisphosphine reductive elimination pathway is due to the steric repulsions between the two PMe3 ligands, which are cis to each other in the transition state (19d-ts).
The two PMe3 ligands are trans in the stable intermediate 18d.
We have also investigated the barrier of alkyl–I reductive elimination with other phosphine ligands.
The results are summarized in Table 1.
The five phenyl substituents on the QPhos ligand were replaced by H in the calculations to reduce computational cost.
This smaller model ligand is denoted as QPhos*.
The Gibbs free energies and enthalpies of the tetracoordinated alkyl Pd( ) intermediates 17, 18 and the reductive elimination transition state 9-ts are given with respect to the tricoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide complex 8.
The activation barrier of reductive elimination is calculated based on the energy difference between 9-ts and the lowest energy intermediate in Table 1.
The most efficient ligands for reductive elimination are QPhos* and P(t-Bu)3, in agreement with the reactivities observed in the experiment.
These bulky ligands promote the formation of tricoordinated complex 8, while tetracoordinated complexes 17 and 18 are formed favorably when smaller ligands are employed.
The formation of the stable tetracoordinated alkyl Pd( ) halide complexes prohibits the reductive elimination.
Although electron-rich ligands, such as P(t-Bu)3 and Q-Phos, are used in the experiment, reductive elimination with electrondeficient ligands is predicted to occur more readily than with electron-rich ligands of similar size.
The reductive elimination barrier with the P(OMe)3 ligand ( D G ¼ 26.9 kcal mol ) is much lower than that with the similar-sized electron-rich PMe3 ligand ( D G ¼ 36.9 kcal mol ), and similar to the barrier with the much bulkier P(i-Pr)3 ligand ( D G ¼ 26.3 kcal mol ).
Electronwithdrawing groups on the ligands facilitate the reductive elimination by promoting the electron-transfer from the substrates to the Pd.
4. Competition with the b -hydride elimination pathway for substrate with syn-b -hydrogens A major limitation of the palladium-catalyzed carboiodination reaction is the requirement of a blocking group on the alkene to prevent Heck-type products from forming.
For example, replacing the methyl group at the internal position of the double bond in 2a with a hydrogen atom, the reaction with aryl iodide 19 gives only Heck-type products 21a and 21b (Scheme 5).
No carboiodination product 20 was observed.
We propose that these products are formed via b -hydride elimination of the alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediate.
We have computed both the carboiodination and the b -hydride elimination pathways from the aryl Pd( ) iodide complex 20.
The calculated Gibbs free energy profiles are shown in Fig.6.
The b -hydride elimination initiates via an isomerization of the tricoordinated alkyl Pd( ) iodide 22 to form an agostic intermediate 23, in which the b -hydrogen is weakly bonded to Pd.
Complex 23 is 8.0 kcal mol less stable than 22.
The b -hydrogen elimination readily occurs via 26-ts and requires an activation energy of only 11.9 kcal mol with respect to the alkyl Pd( ) iodide complex 22.
Upon product dissociation from Pd, the product 21b is formed with an exergonicity of 3.4 kcal mol with respect to 22.
The alkyl–I reductive elimination requires an activation free energy of 29.6 kcal mol , much higher than that of the b -hydrogen elimination pathway.
Therefore, only b hydride elimination product 21b is observed in the reaction of 19.
Designing new ligands to modify the relative transition state energies of reductive elimination compared to b -hydride elimination may eventually allow the desirable carbohalogenation pathway to be favored for substrates with syn- b -hydrogens.
The mechanism of Pd(0)-catalyzed carbohalogenation of alkenes has been investigated with density functional theory.
Calculations with the P(t-Bu)3 ligand indicate a catalytic cycle involving oxidative addition of aryl halide, alkene insertion, and C(sp )–I reductive elimination.
The C(sp )–I reductive elimination leads to a weakly bonded Pd–product complex, which undergoes ligand exchange via a dissociative mechanism to regenerate the catalyst.
The rate-determining step is the C(sp )–I reductive elimination.
Bromides and chlorides are predicted to be less reactive due to the high barriers in the C–X reductive elimination.
The differences between halides are attributed to the different bond dissociation energies of the Pd–X bond that is being cleaved during the reductive elimination.
The Pd–Br and Pd–Cl bonds are much stronger than the Pd–I bond, and thus higher barriers of C–Br and C–Cl reductive eliminations are required.
The steric and electronic effects of ligands on the reactivities of C(sp )–X reductive elimination were investigated.
Bulky ligands, such as P(t-Bu)3 and Q-Phos, facilitate the reductive elimination by preventing the formation of tetracoordinated intermediates.
Stable tetracoordinated alkyl Pd( ) complexes, including the bisphosphine complex and the intramolecular Pd– p complex with the phenyl group, were located with smaller phosphine ligands.
Formation of these tetracoordinated intermediates dramatically increases the barrier of reductive elimination.
Electron-deficient ligands are predicted to facilitate the reductive elimination.
Efforts towards designing new catalysts which lower reaction barriers are under way.
The mechanism of the competing b -hydrogen elimination pathway was also investigated.
For reactions involving a syn- b hydrogen atom in the alkyl Pd( ) iodide intermediate, b -hydrogen elimination is very favorable, leading to Heck-type side products.
Blocking b -elimination by the choice of substrates is the main reason why this example of carboiodination works.
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation (CHE1059084) and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for financial support of this research.
S.G.N. thanks NSERC for a postgraduate scholarship.
Computations were performed on the National Science Foundation Terascale Computing System at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), on the California NanoSystems Institute clusters and UCLA Hoffman2 cluster at IDRE.
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
The methodology is broad in scope with respect to both coupling partners and delivers aminated products in synthetically useful yields.
Computational studies provide the full catalytic cycle of this transformation, and suggest that reductive elimination is the rate-determining step.
Given that carbamates are easy to prepare, robust, inert to Pdcatalysis, and useful for arene functionalization, these substrates are particularly attractive partners for use in synthesis.
The sequential use of carbamate functionalization/site-selective cross-coupling processes highlights the utility of this methodology.
The discovery of methods for the assembly of carbon–nitrogen bonds continues to be an active area of research.
Among the numerous tactics available for C–N bond formation, transition metal-catalyzed processes, led by Buchwald and Hartwig, have become some of the most widely used methods in chemical synthesis.
Recent efforts have focused on the catalytic amination of phenol derivatives, as phenols are readily available, with certain analogs being ideally poised for the synthesis of polysubstituted arenes.
One particularly attractive class of electrophilies is the N,Ndialkyl aryl O-carbamate (1, Fig.1). Features of these substrates include their ease of preparation, pronounced stability, and low reactivity toward Pd(0).
Furthermore, aryl carbamates can be used for arene functionalization prior to a cross-coupling event, using either electrophilic aromatic substitution, directed o-metallation, or recently described Pd- or Ir-catalyzed methods.
Although aryl carbamates have been employed in C–C bond forming processes (Fig.1, 1 / 2), their use in amination reactions (1 / 3), has been less explored.
Specifically, during the course of our own studies, only a single example of carbamate amination was reported using the N,N-diethylcarbamate derivative of phenol.
Considering the importance of transition metalcatalyzed amination reactions in modern synthetic chemistry, coupled with the salient features of carbamate electrophiles, we sought to develop a general method for carbamate amination.
In this manuscript, we report the broad scope of carbamate amination methodology, as well as a computational study of the full catalytic cycle.
In addition, we demonstrate the value of these reaction partners for the synthesis of polysubstituted aryl amines using sequential carbamate functionalization/site-selective cross- coupling methodologies.
Optimization and substrate scope To initiate studies, we attempted the amination of diethylnaphthylcarbamates with morpholine under a variety of reaction conditions.
Although Ni/PCy3-based conditions have been useful for achieving C–C bond formation, it was not possible to achieve amination using related procedures.
After conducting an extensive survey of reaction parameters ((eg), nickel catalysts, ligands, solvents, bases, temperature, etc.
) it was observed that combinations of Ni catalysts and N-heterocyclic carbene ligands promoted the desired amination.
Our laboratory and Chatani’s have previously noted analogous findings in couplings of sulfamates and pivalates, respectively.
We identified the use of catalytic Ni(cod)2, SIPr HCl (4), and NaOtBu, in dioxane at 80 C as optimal reaction conditions for amination and investigated the carbamate substrate scope (Table 1).
Naphthyl carbamates, which typically function well in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling, were excellent substrates for the amination (entries 1 and 2).
Non-fused aromatics were also tolerated by the methodology (entries 3–7).
The electrondonating methoxy group (entry 4) and the electron-withdrawing trifluoromethyl group (entry 5) were suitable substrates.
Methyl substituents at the para and meta positions were tolerated as well (entries 6 and 7).
The feasibility of coupling o-substituted carbamates, in addition to heterocyclic substrates, was examined (Table 2).
Of note, o-substituted aryl carbamates are readily accessible by functionalization of the parent carbamate (using directed metallation or transition metal-catalyzed processes ), but have proven to be exceptionally challenging substrates in the recently discovered nickel-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura coupling.
We were delighted to find that a range of o-substituted phenylcarbamates could be employed in our amination methodology.
Carbon substituents were well-tolerated (entries 1 and 2), as were heteroatoms (entries 3–5).
Furthermore, heterocyclic substrates containing indole or pyridine underwent coupling with morpholine under nickel catalysis (entries 6 and 7).
As shown in Table 3, a variety of amines can be employed in the carbamate amination.
Both cyclic and acyclic secondary amines were tolerated (entries 1–3), in addition to anilines (entries 4–6).
Of note, use of the sterically congested 2, 6-dimethylaniline delivered the corresponding aminated product in 92% yield (entry 6).
The methodology also allows for the coupling of amines with appended heterocycles (entries 7 and 8).
Computational studies Although the mechanism of palladium-based aminations has been studied computationally, no theoretical studies of nickel-catalyzed aminations have been reported.
Furthermore, computational studies involving unconventional phenol-based electrophiles ((eg), esters, carbamates, sulfamates) are rare and have only been examined in the context of C–C bond formation.
Accordingly, we conducted a DFT study of the nickel-catalyzed carbamate amination, using N,N-dimethylphenylcarbamate and dimethylamine as substrates.
The results of this computational study are shown in Fig.2 in the form of a Gibbs free energy diagram, which in turn, provides the full catalytic cycle for carbamate amination.
Analogous to Pd-catalyzed amination, three fundamental steps occur: oxidative addition, deprotonation, and reductive elimination.
Previous mechanistic and theoretical studies on similar Pd- and Ni-catalyzed reactions suggested that the oxidative addition initiates via monoligated h complex 5.
The oxidative addition occurs through five-centered transition state TS6, in which the carbonyl oxygen in the carbamate is coordinated with Ni.
The electron-rich NHC ligand facilitates the oxidative addition, which requires only 5.7 kcal mol with respect to the h complex 5.
Similar oxidative additions with phosphine ligands require much higher activation energies ( D G ¼ 13.5 kcal mol when PCy3 ligand is used).
The oxidative addition leads to a stable intermediate (phenyl) nickel( ) carbamate intermediate 7 (–32.5 kcal mol ).
Complex 7 undergoes ligand exchange with dimethylamine and tert-butoxide to liberate carbamate anion and form intermediate 8 (–18.4 kcal mol ).
This ligand exchange process is endergonic, mainly due to entropic effects.
The proton transfer from the coordinated amine to tert-butoxide (TS9) requires only 3.7 kcal mol activation energy from complex 8.
Subsequent dissociation of tert-butanol gives the (phenyl)(amino)nickel( ) complex 11 (–36.2 kcal mol ).
Reductive elimination then occurs through TS12 (–13.1 kcal mol ), which affords the product complex 13 (–26.2 kcal mol ).
The reductive elimination from 11 toTS12 requires 23.1kcal mol and is the rate-limiting step in the catalytic cycle.
Thus, the overall energy span of the catalytic cycle is 23.1 kcal mol , in agreement with the experimental observations that the amination reaction readily occurs under slightly elevated temperatures.
The barrier for reductive elimination with the Ni(NHC) catalyst is much higher compared to that of Pd-phosphine catalysts.
Following the reductiveelimination,the reactantcomplex5 canbe regeneratedby ligand exchange from the product complex 13 to initiate another catalytic cycle.
The whole catalytic cycle is exergonic by 19.4 kcal mol .
Site-selective cross-couplings and synthetic applications Fig.3 highlights a series of experiments that were undertaken to explore carbamate directing group ability and the low reactivity of these substrates to conventional catalytic transformations.
The key substrate for our studies, dihydroquinone derivative 14, was selected with the aim of simultaneously probing the reactivity of aryl sulfamates, which have also proven to be extremely useful electrophiles in nickel-catalyzed couplings.
Lithiation/ bromination of substrate 14 provided trisubstituted arene 15.
In accord with literature precedent by Snieckus, the lithiation proceeded selectively adjacent to the carbamate.
Bromoarene 15 was subsequently employed in a series of C–C and C–heteroatom bond constructions.
Pd-catalyzed arylation (15 / 17), alkylation (15 / 18), and amination (15 / 19) proceeded smoothly, as did Cu-catalyzed C–N bond formation (15 16).
In all cases, the sulfamate and carbamate were not disturbed.
Having demonstrated the robust nature of carbamates and sulfamates to a variety of conditions, we examined the subsequent cross-couplings of these functional groups (Fig.4). o-Methylated derivative 18, prepared by either o-bromination/ Stille coupling (see Fig.3) or direct o-methylation of 14, was used in this study.
We have found that the sulfamate of 18 is more reactive compared to the carbamate, and that high degrees of selectivity can be obtained in arylation.
Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of 18 furnished carbamate 20 in 52% yield.
Subsequently, carbamate 20 was employed in our nickel-catalyzed amination to furnish polysubstituted aryl amine 21.
We expect that the ability to consecutively cross-couple bromides, sulfamates, and carbamates will be useful in the synthesis of complex molecules.
In summary, we have found that aryl carbamates are excellent substrates for the nickel-catalyzed amination reaction.
The scope of the methodology is broad with respect to both coupling partners, and includes the coupling of electron-rich, heterocyclic, and sterically congested carbamates.
DFT calculations reveal the full catalytic cycle of the nickel-catalyzed carbamate amination and suggest that reductive elimination (23.1 kcal mol barrier) is the rate-determining step.
Moreover, we have demonstrated that aryl carbamates are outstanding precursors for the synthesis of polysubstituted aryl amines using sequential carbamate functionalization/site-selective coupling processes.
The use of this methodology in natural product synthesis will be reported in due course.
The authors are grateful to Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb (T.
M.), DuPont, Eli Lilly, Amgen, NOBCChE/GlaxoSmithKline (T.
M.), the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Chemistry-Biology Interface training program (A.
L.S., USPHS National Research Service Award GM08496) for financial support.
We thank the Garcia-Garibay laboratory (UCLA) for access to instrumentation, Dr.John Greaves (UC Irvine) for mass spectra, K.
N. Houk for helpful discussions, and Materia Inc.for chemicals.
The direct arylation is inherently straightforward and efficient, hence easily creating a large library of aryl TTFs for systematic investigations of structure–property relationships.
The present protocol will thus represent an efficient method for exploiting TTF-based interesting functional materials.
Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) undergoes two reversible one-electron oxidations under mild conditions and is well known as an exceptionally good electron donor.
The charge transfer complexes of TTF, which are composed of its radical cation and the radical anion of an acceptor molecule, tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) for instance, are notable for their electroconductive, magnetic and photophysical properties and have been leading the progress of molecular electronics.
Not only TTF itself but also peripherally functionalised TTF derivatives are important because they exhibit characteristic properties that stem from their substituents.
A wide variety of peripherally modified TTFs have hence been synthesised and extensively investigated.
Aryl-substituted TTFs seem fascinating because the aromatic substituents can dramatically influence the electronic nature of parent TTF through extension of p -conjugation.
However, synthetic routes to aryl TTFs are limited virtually to either connecting an aryl-substituted 1,3-dithiole unit with another 1,3-dithiole unit or coupling a metalated TTF derivative with an aryl halide under palladium catalysis.
The former takes multiple steps for overall synthesis and is hence quite laborious.
The latter is more sensible since the cross-coupling reactions are nowadays highly reliable tools.
However, the cross-coupling strategy always requires tedious preparation of metalated TTF intermediates and naturally results in multistep synthesis.
In particular, the metalation/cross-coupling sequence is quite disadvantageous for the synthesis of densely arylated TTFs.
Moreover, functional group compatibility is problematic because the premetalation inevitably provides a lithiated TTF derivative as an intermediate.
Development of more efficient approaches to such p -extended aryl TTFs is thereby eagerly awaited.
Direct arylation of TTF Transition-metal-catalysed direct C–H arylation of aromatic compounds with aryl halides has been emerging as a powerful alternative to the conventional cross-coupling reaction.
We envisioned that the direct C–H arylation would be applicable to functionalisation of TTF.
This was indeed the case and, after optimisation of reaction conditions, palladium catalysis has allowed the expected arylation.
Treatment of aryl bromides (1 equiv) with TTF (2.5 equiv. ) in the presence of cesium carbonate and catalytic amounts of palladium acetate and tri-tert-butylphosphonium tetrafluoroborate in refluxing THF provided the corresponding monoarylated TTFs in good yields (Table 1).
The experimental procedure is very simple and thus practical (see Experimental section and ESI†).
A variety of functional groups were tolerant under the reaction conditions.
The exact reaction mechanism for the direct arylation is not clear.
It is known that TTF gradually undergoes H/D exchange in the presence of MeONa in MeOD at room temperature to yield TTF-d4.
The protons of TTF would be acidic enough to be deprotonated by carbonate under the arylation conditions.
The high performance of the combination of the palladium catalyst and highly basic cesium carbonate indicates that the reaction would proceed by the concerted metalation–deproto- nation pathway.
The modest yields of monoaryl TTFs 1 resulted from competitive di- and triarylation, which, in other words, implies the high efficiency of our strategy.
Naturally, we could achieve tetraarylation of TTF by employing an excess of aryl bromide, a larger amount of the catalyst and prolonged reaction time (Table 2).
For the syntheses of 2d, 2e, 2l–2n, 1,4-dioxane was the more suitable solvent because of the higher solubilities of di- and triarylated intermediates in hot dioxane.
There are few syntheses of tetraaryl TTFs, which are far less efficient, or employed harsh conditions.
Our protocol is powerful enough to create a large library of new tetraaryl TTFs with extremely high efficiency.
Structural, photochemical and electrochemical properties of arylated TTFs The X-ray crystallographic analysis of tetra(4-tolyl)TTF (2a) (Fig.1) revealed that the dihedral angles between the dithiole unit and the connected tolyl group in the molecule are 36–50, which promises moderate p -conjugation that permits electronic perturbation by the aryl groups attached.
The distances between the two neighbouring TTF mean planes are 3.25 and 4.14 A and the intermolecular distances between the closest sulfur atoms are 3.93 and 4.20 A, which shows effective intermolecular electronic communications through tightly stacked 2a, despite the four tilted 4-tolyl groups.
The UV/vis absorption spectra of monoaryl TTFs 1e, 1f and 1g display broad absorption bands in the visible region (Fig.2a). The absorption bands are dramatically red-shifted as the electron-withdrawing nature of the substituent on the aryl group increase from a dimethylamino group to nitro.
The DFT calculations of 1e–1g (Fig.S30, ESI†) revealed several features: (1) the HOMOs are mostly localised on the TTF, (2) the LUMOs are delocalised to the peripheral aryl groups, (3) the visible absorptions correspond to the HOMO–LUMO transitions and (4) the LUMO energies are significantly lowered as the electron-withdrawing nature increase.
Interestingly, the UV/vis absorption bands of tetraaryl TTFs 2e, 2f and 2g are broader yet similar to those of 1e, 1f and 1g (Fig.2b). The similarity indicates the HOMO–LUMO energy gaps of aryl TTFs do not heavily depend on the number of the linked aryl groups, as supported by the DFT calculations of 2e–2g (Fig.S32, ESI†).
The electrochemical properties of aryl TTFs 1d–1g and 2d–2g were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (Fig.3 and Table 3). For both mono- and tetraaryl series, first and second oxidation For instance, tetrakis(4-dimethylaminophenyl)-substituted 2e and its radical cation [2e] c proved to be more easily oxidised by 0.41 V ( D Eox1) and by 0.39 V ( D Eox2) than the corresponding nitro analogues 2g and [2g] c , respectively.
This arylation could thus readily modulate the oxidation potentials of TTF derivatives.
It is worth noting that the substituent-dependent shift of the oxidation potentials for tetraaryl 2e and 2g is much larger than that for monoaryl 1e and 1g (0.13 V for D Eox1 and 0.14 V for D Eox2).
The oxidation potentials of aryl TTFs were thus found to depend on both the electronic properties and the number of the peripheral aryl groups, which is different from the absorption spectra, that are unrelated to the number of the aryl groups (Fig.2). Also notably, little changes in the Eox2 Eox1 values were observed, indicating small differences in Coulombic repulsion between positive charges in the dications for 1d–1g and 2d–2g.
Tetraaryl TTFs 2a, 2d, 2e and 2f reacted with 2,3-dichloro-5,6dicyanobenzoquinone (DDQ) to yield the corresponding 1 : 1 charge transfer (CT) complexes.
The UV/vis/NIR absorption spectra of the CT complexes in acetonitrile showed typical broad absorption bands in the >600 nm region (Fig.4).
The absorption bands are significantly red-shifted as the electrondonating nature of the aryl group increase, which is opposite to the order for neutral aryl TTFs (Fig.2). In particular, the NIR absorption of the CT complex of 2e is centred around 1100 nm and reaches 1600 nm.
The CT complexes of monoaryl 1e and 1f and tetraaryl 2e and 2f with TCNQ showed UV/vis/NIR absorption spectra as illustrated in Fig.5.
Interestingly, the tetraaryl TTF CT complexes display red-shifted absorptions compared to the corresponding monoaryl ones.
The number of the aryl groups in the aryl TTFs, as well as the electronic characters, has a considerable influence on the absorptions of their cation radicals, while being unrelated to those of the neutral aryl TTFs (Fig.2).
Typical procedure for palladium-catalysed monoarylation reactions Pd(OAc)2 (2.3 mg, 0.01 mmol), PtBu3 HBF4 (8.7 mg, 0.03 mmol) and Cs2CO3 (195.5 mg, 0.60 mmol) were placed in a 20-mL reaction flask under nitrogen.
THF (0.5 mL) was added and the mixture was stirred for 10 min at reflux.
A solution of tetrathiafulvalene (102.2 mg, 0.50 mmol) and 4-bromotoluene (34.2 mg, 0.20 mmol) in THF (0.5 mL) was added.
The mixture was heated at reflux for 3 h.
The organic compounds were extracted with dichloromethane three times.
The combined organic part was washed with brine, passed through a pad of Florisil, dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 and concentrated in vacuo.
The residue was purified by gel permeation chromatography with chloroform as eluent to afford 2-(4-methylphenyl)tetrathiafulvalene (1a) as a yellow solid (30.0 mg, 0.10 mmol, 50%).
Typical procedure for palladium-catalysed tetraarylation reactions Pd(OAc)2 (8.4 mg, 0.038 mmol), PtBu3 HBF4 (32.6 mg, 0.11 mmol) and Cs2CO3 (244.4 mg, 0.75 mmol) were placed in a 20-mL reaction flask under nitrogen.
THF (1.0 mL) was added and the mixture was stirred for 10 min at reflux.
A solution of tetrathiafulvalene (30.7 mg, 0.15 mmol) and 4-bromotoluene (128.3 mg, 0.75 mmol) in THF (1.0 mL) was added.
The mixture was heated at reflux for 15 h.
The organic compounds were extracted with chloroform three times.
The combined organic part was washed with brine, dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 and concentrated in vacuo.
Chromatographic purification on silica gel by using hexane–dichloromethane (or chloroform) as eluent afforded 2,3,6,7-tetra(4-methylphenyl)tetrathiafulvalene (2a) (84.3 mg, 0.15 mmol, 100%) as a red solid.
Crystallographic data for 2a C34H28S4, Mr ¼ 564.85, triclinic, P1, a ¼ 9.217(5), b ¼ 11.524(4), c ¼ 15.597(6) A, a¼ 100.750(14) , b¼ 105.128(17), g¼ 110.659 (17), V ¼ 1423.6(10) A , T ¼ 123 K, Z ¼ 2, R1 ¼ 0.0342 (I > 2 s (I)), wR2 ¼ 0.0948 (all data), GOF ¼ 1.007.
We have reported straightforward synthesis of aryl TTFs by using palladium-catalysed direct C–H arylation.
Our protocol is highly efficient to create a large library of aryl TTFs.
The library has allowed us to systematically investigate the photophysical and electrochemical properties of aryl TTFs and their CT complexes.
The present protocol offers a highly efficient tool for exploiting electroconductive TTF-based materials and functional materials of photo- and electrochemical interest.
This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid (nos.
22245006 (A) and 20108006 ‘‘pi-Space’’ and 22106523 ‘‘Reaction Integration’’) and GCOE Research from MEXT and JSPS.
We thank Professor Hideki Yamochi (Research Center for Low Temperature and Materials Sciences, Kyoto University) for helpful discussion.
H. Y. thanks financial support from Kinki Invention Center.
Various diarylamines were obtained with reaction times ranging from 20 s to 10 min.
The use of microfluidic devices has recently attracted much attention from the pharmaceutical industry.
This is due to the fact that these devices provide several advantages for chemical synthesis, such as enhanced heat- and mass-transfer, safety of operation, the potential for continuous purification, precise control over residence (reaction) time and scalability by operating several devices in parallel (scale-out or numbering-up).
Despite these advantages, several challenges still remain.
One of the biggest hurdles in the development of flow chemistry methods is the handling of solids.
This includes solid reagents, as well as products and by-products.
For example, precipitates can form during the reaction usually leading to irreversible clogging of the microchannels.
Several approaches have been suggested to address this problem.
The use of segmented liquid– liquid flow can prevent the particles from interacting with the reactor walls.
Although this is an effective way to deal with solids, the use of an additional solvent can reduce the efficiency of the reactions or be incompatible with the reagents.
Recently, we have presented a biphasic system of an organic solvent and water, which could solubilize both the organic and inorganic components of a reaction.
However, the presence of water can be detrimental to many reactions.
Ultrasonication and transformations, including 1,4-dioxane, tetrahydrofuran and dinbutyl ether.
Additionally, when using catalysts based on dialkyl biarylmonophosphines, these reactions are typically complete in several minutes, resulting in a very fast generation of these insoluble salts.
This makes the development of a microfluidic system that can manage these conditions a very challenging task.
In this paper, we describe a microfluidic system that is suitable to handle the solid by-products formed in the palladium-catalyzed amination reaction.
Recently, our groups have studied the mechanisms that govern plugging in microfluidic devices.
Both bridging and constriction were shown to be important mechanisms that lead to clogging.
We discovered that bridging could be eliminated via acoustic irradiation while constriction could be managed via fluid velocity.
However, to be synthetically viable a more versatile system had to be developed.
A microfluidic system was assembled as shown in Fig.1. Solutions of the Pd precatalyst 2, reagents and NaOtBu in mechanical vibration have also been shown to be effective in certain cases.
Palladium-catalyzed C–N cross-coupling reactions constitute a commonly utilized technology in both industry and academia.
This methodology allows the coupling of aryl halides or pseudo halides with a wide variety of nitrogen nucleophiles.
These aromatic amines are very common in biologically active molecules and, as a result, a method for performing these reactions in flow would be of great interest.
However, these reactions form inorganic salts (NaCl, NaBr and NaOTf), which are insoluble in the non-polar solvents typically used for these tetrahydrofuran (THF) were loaded into syringes and pumped into the microfluidic system via syringe pumps.
It is worth mentioning that initial experiments showed that a steady flow of the NaOtBu base could not be achieved with an HPLC pump, and more reliable flow rates of the reagents were observed with syringe pumps.
The precatalyst and reagent streams were combined in a T-mixer prior to the introduction of the NaOtBu stream at a second T-mixer.
This second T-mixer was cooled in an ice bath to prevent any significant reaction from taking place during the mixing process.
Without this cooling, the reaction initiated quickly and the salt by-product clogged the T-mixer.
Placing the T-mixer in the ultrasonic bath did not lead to any improvement.
Next, the reagents were introduced into a 400 m L reactor made of PFA tubing (0.04’’ inner diameter, 50 cm length).
This reactor was placed in an ultrasonic bath heated to 60 C.
Upon exiting the reactor, the reaction was mixed with a quench of water and ethyl acetate (EtOAc) in a piece of larger diameter PFA tubing (2 mm inner diameter, 12.7 cm length, 400 m L volume).
This large volume for the quench allowed ample time for the dissolution of the salt by-products.
Without this piece of tubing we observed clogging at the end of the reactor.
After the quench, the reaction stream was connected to an automated fraction collector.
The pumps, both syringe and HPLC, and the fraction collector were controlled via LabVIEW.
Software programs were developed to remotely control the pump flow rates and fraction collection and allowed several experiments to be performed in an automated fashion.
Initially, we conducted the Pd-catalyzed coupling of 4-chloroanisole and aniline with THF as the solvent at 60 C.
The catalytically active L1Pd(0) species was generated starting from the BrettPhos precatalyst 2 (Fig.2) which is the most active catalyst to date for these type of transformations.
As can be seen from Fig.3, the reaction was completed in only 60 s with 0.5 mol% of BrettPhos precatalyst.
This can be compared to our biphasic method where with 1.2 mol% of BrettPhos precatalyst it took 10 min to obtain full conversion.
We also compared these results to those obtained in batch experiments.
As can be seen from Fig.3, there was no loss in activity when the reaction was performed in flow.
In fact, at very short residence times ((eg), 20 s residence time) we observed higher activity for the reaction performed in flow.
This result demonstrates one of the major advantages of flow chemistry, and microfluidics specifically, which is the increased heat- and mass-transfer that allows for very fast, efficient heating, which makes it ideally suited for very rapid reactions.
Encouraged by these results, the coupling reactions of several other aryl chlorides were examined with our microfluidic system (Table 1).
We were able to couple primary aliphatic amines and aryl chlorides in good yield with a residence time of 5 min with 1 mol% of catalyst.
It is noteworthy that these longer residence times were well tolerated by our system.
No clogging due to constriction or bridging was observed at this low flow rate.
Also ortho substituents were well tolerated: the reaction went to full conversion in only 60 s.
2-Chloropyridines could be coupled with primary aromatic amines in less than 60 s in our system.
We then turned our attention to aryl bromides (Table 2).
These electrophiles have been widely used in the initial studies on Pd-catalyzed aminations because of the ease of the oxidative addition step.
Very good results were obtained in flow for electron-rich substrates: full conversion was obtained in 20 s for non-sterically hindered substrates.
Longer residence times were required with substrates bearing ortho substituents, but full conversion was still obtained within 5 min.
For aryl bromides bearing esters, weaker bases are typically used in batch processes.
Although we also observed the formation of a significant amount of the tBu-ester in flow, good yields were obtained for the desired product.
Aryl triflates are generally known to be very reactive substrates in Pd-catalyzed aminations.
These substrates are attractive since they can be easily synthesized from the corresponding phenols.
However, it is known that strong bases such as NaOtBu can mediate triflate hydrolysis leading to lower yields.
Therefore weaker bases such as Cs2CO3 are typically used in batch reactions, resulting in slower reactions.
With our microfluidic system, we have the advantage that we can control the residence times very accurately and can do both the reaction and the workup in flow in a matter of seconds.
Since heat- and mass-transfer are very efficient in microfluidic systems, these reactions can be done very fast before competitive triflate hydrolysis becomes a problem.
As can be seen from Table 3, full conversions were obtained in less than 1 min residence time in all cases.
Also, biologically active compounds, such as d -tocopheramines, could be synthesized very efficiently in only 30 s.
Interestingly, when we used a lower catalyst loading, we observed lower yields of the desired product.
We hypothesized that lower catalyst loadings lead to slower reaction rates allowing for competitive triflate hydrolysis.
These results show that a rigorous control of reaction time and catalyst loading is required to obtain optimal results.
Because we usually obtained full conversion in short reaction times, we investigated lower catalyst loadings in flow.
The combination of short reaction times and low catalyst loadings is of great interest to the pharmaceutical industry.
To obtain good conversions, the reaction was performed at 90 C and dioxane was used as a solvent (Table 4).
The limited solubility of NaOtBu in dioxane required the use of less concentrated solutions.
Nevertheless, with only 0.1 mol% of catalyst loading, we still obtained good conversions with a residence time of 10 min.
With a highly reactive substrate, such as 6-chloro-2-methoxypyridine, full conversion could be obtained in only 1 min.
Increasing the catalyst loading to 0.2 mol% resulted in a full conversion in several other cases.
Having defined a very robust system that can handle solids in a wide range of conditions, we felt that the next challenge would be conducting a long experiment without clogging.
We were able to continuously run the coupling of 4-chloroanisole and aniline in flow with a residence time of 1 min for one hour without any sign of constriction or bridging (Fig.4).
In conclusion, we have developed a fully automated microfluidic system that can efficiently handle solids, even at high concentrations, via acoustic irradiation.
We have demonstrated the robustness of this system with the palladium-catalyzed amination reaction of aryl chlorides, aryl bromides and aryl triflates.
The amination reaction was followed by an immediate work up in flow.
This offered the opportunity to be able to work up reactions quicklyandtodetermineconversions/yieldsprecisely,evenatvery short reaction times.
The latter is something that is difficult to achieve with traditional batch techniques.
Finally, we believe that our system provides new opportunities for continuous flow multistep syntheses that require a heterogeneous reaction.L.B. and K.F.J. thank the Novartis International AG for funding.
In addition, the first general and efficient continuous-flow protocol for the coupling of alkynes with aryl bromides in the absence of copper was reported.
Palladium-catalyzed carbon–carbon bond-forming reactions play a central role in the construction of key building blocks for many industrially-relevant applications.
Among these, the palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling of terminal alkynes and aryl halides (Heck alkynylations, also known as Cu-free Sonogashira coupling reactions) can be considered one of the most important transformations, given the synthetic utility of the product aryl alkynes.
Recently, continuous-flow methods have emerged as interesting new tools for the manufacturing of pharmaceutical compounds or intermediates.
Specifically, microfluidic devices allow reactions to be safely performed at high temperatures and pressures, while allowing control of reaction times, obviating the need to handle reactive intermediates, and providing efficient heat- and mass-transfer.
While flow-based methods using aryl iodides to facilitate the cross-coupling of sp and sp carbon atoms have been reported, these methods suffer in general from relatively high catalyst loadings (>5 mol%) and limited substrate scope.
Thus, the development of more versatile processes for palladium-catalyzed alkynylations, specifically under continuous-flow conditions, would be significant.
We aimed to develop a method that was also effective with less reactive and expensive electrophiles, such as aryl bromides, chlorides and tosylates.
Herein, we report the coupling of alkynes with aryl chlorides and bromides using a palladium precatalyst, which represents the first general and efficient continuous-flow protocol for the coupling of alkynes with aryl bromides in the absence of copper.
In 2003, our group reported that a catalyst system based on PdCl2(CH3CN)2/XPhos demonstrated excellent reactivity in the Heck alkynylation reaction.
This system employed 1 mol% of palladium and 3 mol% of XPhos as the ligand.
Formation of the catalytically active species was achieved by premixing the ligand and PdCl2(CH3CN)2 for 30 min at room temperature prior to addition of the substrates and base.
While this transformation was generally broad in scope, heteroaryl halides and heteroaryl substituted alkynes were less efficiently transformed.
We started our investigation by comparing the previously reported conditions with those employing our newly developed second-generation XPhos precatalyst.
This precatalyst, which was originally developed for Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, can be obtained in a simple one-pot procedure starting from commercially available chemicals, and generates the catalytically active LPd(0) species efficiently upon treatment with a base.
With 1 mol % XPhos precatalyst 2a (Fig.1), we found that full substrate conversion and 86% yield of product could be obtained within 1 h.
In contrast, only 74% conversion and 61% yield were obtained under the previously reported conditions (Scheme 1).
Next, we investigated the effectiveness of several other precatalysts 2 with various biaryl phosphine ligands (Fig.2). With a precatalyst based on DavePhos, full conversion was observed after 1 h at 70 C, affording 5a in 81% yield.
When precatalysts with Cy-JohnPhos, SPhos or RuPhos as ligands were employed, only partial conversion was observed.
Adding additional XPhos to 2a increased the overall conversion and yield (Fig.3). Increasing the amount of additional ligand from 0.1 to 1.0 mol% increased the conversion from 36 to 82% at room temperature over a 24 h reaction time.
Further increasing the amount of ligand did not offer any additional advantage.
Thus, a 1 : 1 mixture of 2a : XPhos was chosen as optimal for further studies.
With this combination, most substrate combinations could be successfully converted to product using only 0.25 mol% palladium.
With these optimized conditions in hand, we next examined a variety of substituted aryl halides and pseudo-halides with various alkynes (Table 1).
In general, this protocol was effective for a wide range of substrates and manifested broad functional group tolerance.
Aryl bromides and chlorides with both electrondonating and electron-withdrawing substituents were all suitable substrates for this transformation.
Aryl halides bearing ortho substituents could also be efficiently coupled.
Heteroaromatic halides, such as pyridinyl, isoquinolinyl, pyridazinyl, benzothiazolyl and pyrimidinyl, underwent the coupling reaction smoothly, affording the corresponding products in good to excellent yields.
In addition, various alkynes with alkyl, aryl and heteroaryl substitutents were efficient coupling partners.
It is worth noting that the conditions could be applied to the coupling of an aryl tosylate, which are typically less reactive in alkyne coupling reactions.
Using our previously described conditions, this transformation was only successful when the alkyne was added slowly over the course of the reaction, to diminish alkyne oligomerization.
Having demonstrated a broad substrate scope for the alkyne coupling reaction as a batch process, we next focused on applying this reaction protocol to continuous-flow conditions.
To be applicable, two key points would be addressed.
First, the reaction time should be significantly decreased to minimize the required reactor volume.
Second, the use of insoluble bases and the formation of precipitates had to be minimized to prevent clogging of the microchannels.
With these in mind, we reexamined different bases for the coupling of 4-bromotoluene with 1-dodecyne (Table 2).
We found that when potassium hydroxide was used as the base, full conversion was obtained in only 20 min, affording the desired product in 76% yield (Table 2).
With other bases, only partial conversion was observed within the same period of time.
Realizing that the presence of inorganic bases and the formation of bromide precipitates could be problematic for a continuous-flow process, we examined the effect of adding water, that should help dissolve any inorganic salts.
When the alkynyl coupling was conducted in a 10 : 1 mixture of CH3CN– H2O at 100 C, it reached completion in 10 min.
However, we found that precatalyst 2a was only partially soluble in acetonitrile at room temperature.
To increase the solubility of the precatalyst, we added DMF as a co-solvent, which afforded the product in 95% GC yield in 10 min.
Unfortunately, when other substrates were tested under these conditions, the desired product was obtained along with semi- and fully-hydrogenated products.
We hypothesize that DMF serves as a hydrogen donor under these strongly basic conditions.
Next, we examined alternative solvents and found that the reaction could be completed in dioxane and DMSO, with 66% and 64% yield, respectively.
In other solvent systems, full conversion was not observed in 10 min (Table 3).
The optimal ratio of dioxane to water was found to be 4 : 3, producing the product in 100% GC yield.
Further dilution of the base had no significant effect on the results (Fig.4).
A microfluidic system was assembled as shown in Fig.5 and 4 : 3 dioxane–water was employed.
Solutions of aryl bromides, alkynes and PEG 200 in dioxane, as well as aqueous potassium hydroxide (0.87 M), were loaded into syringes and introduced into the microfluidic system via one syringe pump.
The reagent stream, the base stream, and the solution of XPhos precatalyst 2a and XPhos in dioxane were combined in a cross-mixer.
The combined biphasic solution was introduced into a 450 m L packed-bed reactor filled with stainless steel spheres at 110 C with a 10 psi back-pressure regulator.
Upon exiting the reactor, the product stream was quenched with a stream of water and ethyl acetate.
This continuous-flow protocol could be applied to the crosscoupling of various aryl bromides and alkynes (Table 4).
As in batch, aryl bromides with electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituents were all good substrates for this transformation.
In addition, aryl bromides bearing ortho substituents as well as heteroaromatic bromides were good substrates in this reaction.
In the case of base-sensitive substrates containing ethyl ester or acetyl substituents, K3PO4 could be used in place of KOH.
In summary, we have developed a general process for the palladium-catalyzed reaction of aryl chlorides, bromides and tosylates with terminal alkynes in the absence of copper.
This new protocol features low catalyst loadings, operationally simple procedures, and a good level functional group tolerance.
We have also developed the first general and efficient continuousflow protocol for the coupling of alkynes with aryl bromides in the absence of copper.
This copper-free flow strategy proceeded smoothly with a low palladium catalyst loading and a broad substrate scope.
The flow protocol is highly efficient (1–7 min residence time), and provides an attractive and practical way to prepare aryl alkynes on a large scale.
We thank Novartis International AG for funding.
Intracellular delivery of functional macromolecules using nano and micro-sized polymeric particles is widely used in the life sciences due to their e ffi ciency in being able to deliver cargos into cells in a benign manner.
Sensors conjugated to particles have, for example, been utilised to reveal important insights concerning the physiological state of a cell, such as intracellular pH, ion concentrations, and the functional states of proteins.
In addition, particles have been employed to deliver a wide range of bioactive compounds into cells including drugs, proteins and nucleic acids; moreover;  uorescently labelled particles have been used to track and sort cells.
Non-degradable polystyrene nanoparticles have been used in vitro cellular uptake and in vivo tracking experiments because of their non-immunogenic properties and low cytotoxicity.
They have been used to track the stem cells in the generation of chimera, perhaps the most robust proof possible of non-toxicity.
In addition, the particle ’ s size and surface modi  cation can easily be varied.
The ability to functionalise non-degradable nanoparticles such as polymeric, magnetic or quantum dots is extremely relevant due to their proposed biomedical applications.
Such nanoparticles can be used as a multi-tasking platform, for instance, the combination of  uorescent markers and MRI contrast agents or photothermal therapy and hyperthermia agents would allow simultaneous diagnosis and therapeutic application of internalised nanoparticles.
Typical bioconjugation techniques, such as thiol – maleimide addition or amide coupling reactions are applied in the construction of particle bioconjugates.
However, a variety of competing nucleophiles and electrophiles present in complex biomolecules hamper their use.
Huisgen cycloaddition chemistry can be used to ligate alkyne-functionalised cargos onto azide-functionalised particles in a bioorthogonal fashion, but typically requires copper ion catalysis.
The e ffi cient, selective and benign bioconjugation of cargo molecules onto nanoparticlesthereforeremainsanimportantchallenge,andonethat becomesevenmorecomplexwhenparticlesarerequiredtocarry two or more cargos.
This can be achieved using particles with multiple bioorthogonal, functional groups on their surface.
Stucky and co-workers have prepared dual-functionalised amine and azide particles while Li et al. synthesised a block copolymer, containing amine, acylhydrazide and azide groups, which was used to coat and functionalise gold nanoparticles.
Recently, we have demonstrated the synthesis and reaction monitoring of aminomethyl-functionalised nanoparticles which can be further derivatised with a variety of reactive functional groups.
However, to boost the particle properties, we aimed to introduce an additional functionality allowing chemoselective conjugation onto the particle ’ s surface.
Inspired by the challenges and demands of synthesising novel nanoparticles while developing new conjugation techniques, herein we describe the development of dual (HO)2B/ H2N-functionalised polymeric nanoparticles.
Further, we investigated their derivatisation via orthogonal Pd-mediated Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling and amide bond formation, and demonstrate the bene  ts of these dual-functionalised nanoparticles by e ffi cient cellular uptake, intracellular cargo liberation and organelle targeting.
Particle synthesis Lately, carbon – carbon bond formation via Pd-catalysed reactions, has been used to modify proteins, label cell membranes, and to carry out novel intracellular chemistry in a manner that is fully orthogonal to amide bond formation.
To the best of our knowledge Pd-mediated nanoparticle functionalisation has not been reported and we therefore targeted this approach to allow bioorthogonal nanoparticle conjugation.
The (HO)2B/H2N-particles ( 5–8 ) were prepared by emulsi  erfree emulsion polymerisation of styrene 1 , cross-linker divinylbenzene 2 (2%), 4-vinylbenzylamine hydrochloride 3 (VBAH, 3%), and varying amounts of 4-vinylbenzylboronic acid 4 (VBA, 0 – 9%) (Scheme 1a).
The particles 5–8 all had a hydrodynamic diameter between 200 and 260 nm as determined by dynamic light scattering (Scheme 1b, Table 1, Fig.S1 † ) regardless of the level of VBA incorporation.
However, they showed varying polydispersity indices (PDI) (Table 1).
Particles 6 , polymerised with 3% VBA, had a PDI of 0.071, similar to particles 5 synthesised without VBA (0.060), both being classi  ed as monodisperse (PDI &lt; 0.1).
Further increase in VBA levels lead to polydisperse particles with PDIs of 0.190 (6% VBA, 7 ) and 0.313 (9% VBA, 8 ) which were con  rmed by scanning electron microscopy (Scheme 1b, Fig.S1 † ).
Presumably, 7 and 8 were polydisperse resulting from increased acid – base interactions between VBAH 3 and VBA 4 disturbing the VBAH-mediated micelle formation during the polymerisation.
The dual-functionalisation of the nanoparticles was quantitatively veri ed by ninhydrin analysis for amine loading and ICP-OES analysis for boronic acid loading levels (Table 1).
The addition of 3% VBA in the synthesis gave particles 6 with a boronic acid loading of 62 m mol g1.
An increase in VBA levels (6% or 9%) resulted in an approximately 2-fold (116 m mol g1, 7 ) and 3-fold (204 m mol g1, 8 ) increase in boron content.
Due to the good polydispersity, in combination with the good boronic acid and aminomethyl loadings, particles 6 were selected for Pdmediated conjugation and biological studies.
Palladium-mediated particle conjugation In order to study Pd-mediated Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling onto the particles 5-iodo  uorescein 9 was coupled onto 6 (Scheme 2a) with various Pd salts screened in physiological buffers.
This allowed monitoring of the conjugation reaction by increases in particle  uorescence in addition to a decrease in the boron content (Table S5 † ) with the best reaction conditions identi  ed to be in PBS at 37 C with the water soluble complex of 2-amino-4,6-dihydroxypyrimidine – Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst.
Following the coupling, two independent techniques, ICPOES and ow cytometry, were applied to verify the degree of  uorescein conjugation.
ICP-OES analysis of 10 revealed a 40% reduction in the boron content (Scheme 2b, dark grey columns), while ow cytometry analysis of 10 revealed a 500-fold increase in particle  uorescence compared to the precursor particles 6 (Scheme 2b, light grey columns).
Two control reactions were run, one in which 5-iodo  uorescein was replaced with  uorescein and a second in which the catalyst was removed from the reaction mixture.
As expected, both control reactions resulted in unchanged boron content and particle  uorescence.
To con  rm the reproducibility of palladium-mediated particle conjugation, the optimised conditions were performed on a model system in triplicate and the e ffi ciency of conjugation was determined by measuring the boron consumption using ICP-OES.
The conjugation reactions were highly reproducible (38 4% conjugation e ffi ciency).
Quantitative yields were not achieved presumably due to the distribution of the boronic acid groups between the particle ’ s “ surface ” and “ interior ” with coupling to the latter increasingly more di ffi cult due to the steric demands, in agreement with recent reports that demonstrated that modi  cations of azide-functionalised nanoparticles with alkyne modi  ed  uorescein by Cu-catalysed click chemistry was dependent on the polymerisation process, surfactants used and accessible azide groups.
Advantages of the Pd-mediated Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling over the Cucatalysed click reaction are the benign nature of the Pd catalyst, while oxidation of biological substrates has also been observed with Cu-catalysed click chemistry due to the hydrogen peroxide and superoxide radicals produced by copper ion mediated catalytic oxidation of sodium ascorbate by molecular oxygen.
Palladium catalysed reactions have been used to modify proteins, label cell membranes, and to carry out novel intracellular chemistry without any observed apparent toxicity or substrate sensitivity towards palladium.
The above results thus con  rmed the ability of Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling reactions to conjugate cargo molecules onto the (HO)2B/H2Nparticles in a biocompatible manner.
Cellular uptake and viability Following the successful Pd-mediated conjugation of  uorophore 9 onto the particles, the cellular uptake of the  uorescein conjugated particles 10 into HEK293T and HeLa cells was analysed by  ow cytometry.
This demonstrated successful internalisation of the particles with increasing particle concentrations lead to increasing intracellular  uorescence (Fig.1, external  uorescence quenched with trypan blue.
For histograms and microscopy images see Fig.S5 and S6 † ).
A 14fold increase in cellular  uorescence was observed with the highest particle concentration (75 g mL1) with no apparent cellular toxicity (Fig.S15 † ).
Boronic acid groups are known for their high a nity towards diols which has been used to develop glucose sensors.
As described above, the Pd-coupling is not quantitative leaving boronic acid groups on the nanoparticle surface.
To investigate if the boronic acid groups could induce cellular toxicity, cell viability assays were also carried out with non-functionalised (HO)2B/H2N-nanoparticles 6 and demonstrated no cellular toxicity (Fig.S13 † ).
These results demonstrated that the (HO)2B/ H2N-nanoparticles, are readily functionalised by Suzuki Miyaura cross-coupling, that the modi  ed particles are e ffi ciently taken up by the cells without any toxicity from the residual boronic acid particles and that Pd-levels on the particles are negligible.
Bioorthogonal dual-functionalisation of the particles The (HO)2B/H2N-nanoparticles 6 were subsequently dual functionalised to carry a Cy5 dye and cargo moiety which, upon cellular uptake, will be released from the particles (Scheme 3a).
The Cy5 dye on the particles would enable cellular uptake quanti  cation, while the cargo moiety (a peptide) was designed to contain a “ turn-on ”  uorescence signal that would only become active following intracellular release of the cargo.
This was based on a cleavable disulphide linker connecting a  uorescence quencher (methyl red) and  uorescein to the cargo.
Upon cellular uptake, intracellular cleavage of the disulphide bond would release the cargo from the particles allowing “ turn-on ” of  uorescence (Scheme 3a) (as a control the disulphide bond was replaced with a hydrocarbon linkage).
The cargo moiety was chosen to be a short anionic peptide sequence, DDGD, which would avoid leakage of the released  uorescein out of the cell.
The particle construct 13 was prepared by coupling Cy5 via carbodiimide chemistry while the (HO)2B-groups on the particle surface allowed bioorthogonal conjugation of an unprotected peptide cargo containing an aryl-iodide via Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling (Scheme 3b, Fig.S2 ). ICP-OES measurement of the particles revealed a decrease in the boron content for particles 13 (23%).
The ability of 13 to release uorescein was investigated in vitro by treatment with dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by analysis of the  uorescence of the particles supernatant.
Fluorescence was only detected a  er DTT (10 mM) treatment of the disulphide-linked probe.
As expected, control particles 14 did not release  uorescein (Fig.S3 † ).
Particles 13 and 14 were incubated with HEK293T and HeLa cells and cellular uptake monitored by  ow cytometry detecting Cy5.
The Cy5  uorescence was equal for cells incubated with particles 13 and 14 con  rming similar intracellular uptake (Fig.S8 ). However, a  er 48 h incubation a intracellular  uorescence signal ” turn-on ” was detected, demonstrating the intracellular cleavage of the disulphide bond and subsequent release of the  uorescein peptide reporter from particles 13 (Fig.2). Confocal  uorescence microscopy veri  ed linkerdependent cargo release from the particles and cytosolic localisation (Fig.3). In contrast, the control particles 14 did not release the  uorescent reporter (Fig.2 and 3).
Finally, a particle construct was prepared with the intention of delivering the cargo into the cell nucleus.
Thus a cargo containing the peptide PKKKRKV, a known nuclear localisation signal (NLS), and the previously described uorescein – methyl red quencher system was conjugated onto the Cy5-labelled particles affording particles 15 (cleavable disulphide linker) and the non-cleavable control 16 (Scheme 3b).
The synthesis of the particles followed the previously established route via coupling of Cy5 onto (HO)2B/H2N-particles following the probe conjugation via Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling of an iodo-aryl tagged unprotected peptide (Scheme 3b).
As expected, uptake of particles 15 resulted in  uorescent “ turn-on ” in HEK293T and HeLa cells with  uorescein accumulated into the cell nucleus (Fig.4). In contrast, the control particles 16 did not release the NLS-construct and uorescein was not observed in the nucleus (Fig.4). These studies demonstrate the advantages and applications of dual-functionalisation of particles.
The attachment of an independent Cy5-label on the particles allowed quantitative measurement of cellular uptake of the particles while the cargo-sensor construct was readily conjugated to the particle and demonstrated intracellular release of the cargo by “ turn-on ” of  uorescence.
In conclusion, the preparation of dual-functionalised nanoparticles containing bioorthogonal boronic acid and aminomethyl groups was successfully demonstrated.
The boronic acid groups on the particles allowed the conjugation of complex peptide-reporter cargos by Pd-mediated Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling.
This conjugation method is reported for the  rst time and extends the repertoire of benign bioconjugation methods in a bioorthogonal fashion.
The modi  ed particles with attached cargos were successfully internalised into cells without cellular toxicity and the applications of these particles demonstrated by intracellular delivery and release of cargos with organelle targeting.
Future applications of the dualfunctionalised particles as well as the conjugation technique may address the awaiting challenges and opportunities in the  eld of nanoparticles in chemical biology.
Particle synthesis Styrene 1 (122 m L, 1 mmol, freshly washed with 4 25% NaOH and 4 brine), divinylbenzene 2 (3.1 m L, 22 m mol, 2 mol% with regards to styrene, freshly washed with 4 25% NaOH and 4 brine), VBAH 3 (5.9 mg, 35 m mol, 3 mol%), 4-vinylbenzylboronic acid 4 (0%; 3%: 5.2 mg, 35 m mol; 6% 10.4 mg, 70 m mol; 9% 15.5 mg, 105 m mol), 2,2-azobis (2-methylpropionamidine) dihydrochloride (V-50) (1.6 mg, 6 m mol) and MgSO4 (0.4 mg, 3 m mol) were added to N2 purged water (2 mL).
The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature under atmosphere of N2 for 15 min and subsequently stirred at 80 C for 15 h.
Upon cooling to room temperature, the particles were collected by centrifugation (15 min at 30 000g, Eppendorf 5430R) and washed with DMF (3 2 mL), MeOH (3 2 mL) and water (3 2 mL).
The particles were stored in water at a solid content of 20 mg mL1.
General procedure for Pd-mediated particle conjugation Conjugation ofiodatedcargo was carried outby Suzuki – Miyaura cross-coupling.
A solution of cargo (40 m mol, 50 equiv. ) in DMSO (4 m L) was prepared and added to a suspension of (HO)2B/H2Nparticles (0.8 m mol, 1 equiv. ) in PBS (1000 m L, pH 7.4) and sonicated for 1 min.
A  erwards, catalyst stock solution (2 m mol, 0.2 m L,5%)wereaddedandthereactionmixtureshakenat1400rpm at 37 C for 12 h.
The particle mixture was washed in water (3 1 mL) and stored in PBS at a concentration of 10 mg mL1.
Cellular uptake HEK293T and HeLa were plated in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum, -glutamine (4 mM) and antibiotics (100 units per mL penicillin and 100 units per L streptomycin) growth media in a 24-well plate at a density of 20 000 cells per well and grown for 24 h at 37 C and 5% CO2.
Therea  er, particles in media (12.5 – 75 m g mL1) were added and incubated with the cells for 24 h.
Cells were washed with PBS (2 350 m L) and incubated for a further 24 h.
A er incubation, cells were washed with PBS (2 350 m L), and imaged under a Leica DM IRB  uorescence microscope or  uorescence pictures were taken on a Leica SP5 confocal microscope.
Zeiss 510 Meta so  ware was used for digital acquisition.
Images were processed using AutoQuant X so  ware.
Quantitative  ow cytometric analysis was carried out following the above mentioned particle incubation procedure.
Following washing, cells were harvested with trypsin/EDTA and analysed by  ow cytometry (BD FACSAria using FlowJo Version 7.6.3 so  ware for data analysis).
Flow cytometry was carried out in triplicate and by addition of 2% trypan blue to quench any extracellular  uorescence.
The authors would like to thank the MRC UK (F.T.), the European Commission for Marie Curie International Incoming Fellowship to S.V.C. (Project No. PIIF-GA-2009-254238) and Dr Annamaria Lilienkampf for helpful discussions.
The modern synthetic chemist, while empowered with an impressive arsenal of reaction technologies that enable rapid assembly of acyclic molecules, is confronted with the rich challenges posed by architecturally complex cyclic structural motifs.
In principle, stereode  ned linear molecules can function as precursors to carbocyclic derivatives.
Yet few methods, among which alkene metathesis is arguably foremost, make possible the conjoining of two ends of a chain to form ring products, a limitation that has frustrated our own efforts in synthesis.
Motivated by the di ffi culties of preparing in convergent fashion a number of heteroatom-rich polycyclic targets, we have sought to identify new types of carbocyclization processes from functionalized acyclic molecules bearing common ‘ end ’ groups.
Our efforts in this area have resulted in the development of an intramolecular coupling reaction of unsaturated thioesters (Fig.1A). This method operates under the action of a catalytic palladium source, copper thiophene-2-carboxylate, and zinc formate, the latter of which is critical for achieving e ffi cient turnover numbers.
We expect this process to be of general utility in synthesis and hope that our  ndings embolden future studies to identify new catalytic processes that transform complex linear molecules into carbocyclic ring products.
Although intramolecular ole  n hydroacylation of unsaturated aldehydes has been studied extensively, the preparation of cycloalkanone products through analogous coupling reactions of carboxylic acid derivatives and alkenes (or alkynes)  nds considerably less precedent.
In our hands, attempts to promote cyclization of d , 3 -unsaturated acid chlorides under palladium catalysis afforded none of the desired cyclic products (eqn (1)).
These results prompted us to consider alternative starting materials, which included thioester derivatives.
The decision to investigate such substrates ((ie), 1 , Table 1) was based on the growing body of literature highlighting the facility of thioesters to engage in metal-catalyzed transformations.
Pioneering work by Fukuyama et al. and Liebeskind et al. has demonstrated that thioesters may be directly converted to the corresponding aldehydes and ketones under palladium catalysis.
These conditions o  en take advantage of thiophilic metal co-factors both to activate the thioester C – S bond for oxidative addition and to sequester the liberated thiolate anion.
Privileged among the many available thiophilic metal additives available are the copper( ) salts made prominent by Liebeskind.
In a series of reports, Liebeskind has demonstrated the superior ability of select copper( ) carboxylates, in particular copper( ) thiophene-2-carboxylate (CuTC), in concert with palladium salts to facilitate acyl-palladium formation.
These studies provided the backdrop for our own investigations.
Thioester 1 (Table 1) was selected as a convenient starting material for exploratory reaction development.
Initial attempts to promote cyclization of this material successfully afforded enone 2 , albeit at low conversion.
Extensive screening of palladium sources, ligands, solvents, and temperature had little effect on improving the reaction.
Use of phosphine ligands, such as P(2-furyl)3, in catalytic amounts necessitated that a large excess of CuTC also be employed (entry 1).
Increasing ligand loading did not provide for a compensatory reduction in CuTC equivalents.
The overall amount of CuTC, however, could be lowered with no evident loss in product conversion by replacing the triarylphosphine ligand with a trialkylphosphite, speci  cally P(OMe)3 (entries 2 and 3).
The effectiveness of P(OMe)3 in this process may be due, in part, to its in  uence on the partial dissolution of CuTC, which appears to be largely insoluble in THF.
It is also possible that the phosphite ligand creates a more sterically accessible and electrophilic coordination environment for alkene binding.
In this regard, use of other phosphite ligands such as P(OiPr)3 shows a pronounced diminution in product formation (entry 5, Table 1).
Having selected P(OMe)3 as the optimal ligand/additive, we were challenged with making additional modi  cations to the protocol that would substantially improve catalyst turnover numbers.
The in  uence of tertiary amine additives on reaction performance was examined with the expectation that a nitrogen base would facilitate Pd(0) regeneration (entries 6 and 7); these conditions gave disappointing results.
In considering that both Liebeskind and Fukuyama have utilized zinc compounds to effect cross-coupling reactions with thioorganic substrates, we questioned whether a zinc additive would promote turnover (entries 8 – 11).
Of the zinc( ) salts tested, the formate complex (entry 11) was unique, with production of 2 increasing by over 40% as compared to all other reaction conditions examined.
Zinc formate, however, cannot be used in place of CuTC, underscoring the importance of a copper additive for thioester activation (entry 12).
Other formate sources do not afford similar enhancements in turnover number (entries 13 and 14).
At this time, we speculate that zinc formate may retard the rate of Pd aggregate and/or Pd black formation.
Examination of our optimized protocol with thioester derivatives appearing in Table 2 serves to illustrate the scope and utility of the cyclization reaction.
The critical role of zinc formate in this cyclization process is evident from entries 2, 3, 5, 6, 9 and 10; reactions conducted in the absence of zinc formate furnish &lt;30% of the desired product (product % conversion in parentheses).
By contrast, our optimized conditions perform with a range of disparate examples, affording both  ve and six-membered carbocycles in moderate to excellent yield.
As noted in related Chemical Science Edge Article processes involving acyl-metal intermediates ((eg) intramolecular hydroacylation), formation of 5-membered ring structures is generally more e ffi cient when compared to reactions that furnish cyclohexyl products (entries 1 and 2, Table 2).
Not surprisingly, substrates possessing a geminally disubstituted center and that are predisposed towards cyclization are particularly well-suited to this process (cf.
entries 3 and 4). Carbocyclization reactions also perform e ffi ciently with unsaturated thioesters bearing a range of common functional groups, including ethers, nitriles, and oxyesters.
The tricarbonyl derivative shown in entry 6 highlights the uniqueness of the thioester to undergo selective activation and subsequent cyclization.
Substitution at the a -carbon of the thioester delivers cyclic ketone products in modest yields (entries 9 and 10, Table 2).
In these substrates, competitive decarbonylation and b -hydride elimination appears to arrest catalyst turnover.
We have found that subjecting a -phenyl thioester 3 to the reaction conditions returns almost entirely starting material and trace amounts of the skipped diene (eqn (2)).
Formation of this minor product is the result of decarbonylation of the acyl-Pd intermediate and subsequent b -hydride elimination.
The stability of the acyl-Pd species and the rate of CO loss are arguably the principle competing factors that lower catalyst turnover numbers.
Future modi  cations to our protocol that can extend the lifetime of the acyl-metal adduct should lead to increased reaction scope and may allow for the preparation of larger-membered carbocyclic rings.
Consistent with our hypothesis that successful cyclization necessitates the acyl-Pd intermediate be rapidly intercepted by the pendant nucleophile, internal alkenes do not engage as coupling partners in this reaction.
We conclude that the additional steric hindrance of such ole  ns adversely in  uences coordination to the acyl-Pd species.
Spent reaction mixtures from tests with internal alkenes consist primarily of starting material, along with trace amounts of decarbonylated decomposition products.
Suppositions based on the instability of the putative acyl-Pd intermediate have guided substrate design.
Following the work of Willis and Dong, we have found that appropriate placement of a weakly coordinating group such as an alcohol or ether helps promote cyclization of 3 , z -unsaturated thioesters to give cyclohexanone products (Table 3).
Comparison of entries 1 – 3 show demonstrable differences in reaction performance based on the choice of the b -substituent group.
The highest product yield is obtained for entry 1, in which the tertiary alcohol is positioned appropriately to chelate the acyl-Pd species.
Thioesters bearing weakly coordinating b -groups ((eg), acetate, silyl ether) are considerably less effective as substrates (entries 2 and 3), and the gem-dimethyl derivative shown in entry 4 gives no detectable amount of the desired cyclohexenone.
Other b -alcohol and ether derivatives (entries 5 and 6) can be successfully employed in this cyclization process, giving the desired 6-membered ring structures in yields exceeding 60%.
Entry 5 highlights the utility of the thioester coupling method for the preparation of fused bicyclic structures, a common motif in natural and synthetic materials.
Collectively, these results are consistent with a role for internal coordination of the acyl-Pd intermediate and offer a practical solution for expanding the substrate scope of this method.
We have initiated studies with alkyne-substituted thioesters with the goal of identifying coupling partners other than terminal alkenes that can engage in facile acyl-palladation.
In these reactions and as an added feature of this coupling technology, the vinyl-Pd intermediate may be intercepted with a nucleophile to afford b -substituted enone products.
We have found that treatment of methyl-substituted alkyne 5 with 10 mol % Pd(OAc)2 and 3.2 equivalents of CuTC in the presence of phenyl boronic acid affords ketone 6 in 56% yield (Fig.2). Despite the similarity of these conditions to known methods for thioester – boronic acid cross-coupling, none of the phenyl ketone product is detected in this reaction.
Although terminal alkynes fail to cyclize, other internal alkynes such as 7 are e ffi ciently and stereospeci  cally converted to the b , b -disubstituted enone products.
Such compounds are di cult to prepare in isomerically pure form using alternative tactics, a fact that serves to further underscore the utility of our method.
We have developed an intramolecular thioester – ole  n crosscoupling reaction as a technology for generating cycloalkanones from simple acyclic precursors.
Under the action of catalytic Pd(OAc)2, starting thioesters decorated with a number of common functional groups can be e ffi ciently processed to the corresponding enones.
Our  ndings offer a distinct approach for carbocycle synthesis and give impetus for further investigations to identify methods that enable ring formation from polysubstituted acyclic starting materials.
We are grateful to Mr.Lorenz-Maximillian Schneider for his assistance in the exploratory phase of this work.
We thank Drs. David Olson and Fred Menard for helpful discussions.
Prof. T. K. Vinod of Western Illinois University is acknowledged for several discussions regarding substrate preparation.
APT is the recipient of an NSF pre-doctoral graduate fellowship.
T.K. was supportedas a visiting scientist by Eisai Pharmaceuticals.
We are most grateful to Eisai, P  zer, and Stanford University for support of this work.
The cyclic vinylpalladium complex was propounded to be the intermediate during the olefination reaction of enamides.
An efficient catalytic system for oxidative cross-coupling reaction of enamides with electron-deficient olefins catalyzed by palladium( ) acetate and 1 atm oxygen as sole oxidant was developed.
The corresponding products were obtained in moderate to good yields under mild conditions.
During the last few decades, palladium-catalyzed coupling reaction has grown to become an attractive and powerful method for the formation of new C–C and C–heteroatom bonds.
Particularly, the atom economical merits conferred upon direct C–H bond functionalization catalyzed by palladium catalyst (1) vation is one of the most well-studied (eqn (1)).
Evidences of palladacyclic intermediate generated during coupling process have been disclosed.
On the other hand, the formation of analogous vinylpalladium complex via alkenyl C–H bond direct functionalization lies in obscurity due to lack of detailed investigation.
Recently our group presented a direct arylation of cyclic enamides at their b -position with aryl boronic acids or aryl silanes by using palladium( ) acetate as catalyst.
A cyclic vinylpalladium intermediate was invoked in the catalytic cycle proposed for the coupling reaction (eqn (2)), although we were unfortunately not able to conclusively establish the vinylpalladium species at that moment.
In this communication, we describe the independent synthesis, characterization, and reactivity studies of the vinylpalladium complex that is propounded to be the coupling intermediate in the above-said reaction.
(2) Initial studies and reaction optimization A mixture of N-[1-(naphthalen-2-yl)vinyl]acetamide (1k) and palladium( ) acetate (1 equiv) in DMSO-d6 was stirred in a round-bottom flask under an atmosphere of air for 12 h at 25 C (or 10 min at 80 C).
Subsequent analysis by H NMR revealed that the signal of one of the terminal alkenyl protons disappeared from the spectrum completely.
The new complex was isolated as a solid via deposition with dry diethyl ether.
A crystal suitable for X-ray analysis was prepared by recrystallization and a six-membered vinylpalladium cyclic intermediate (1k 0 ) was unveiled.
Next tert-butyl acrylate was introduced into the vinylpalladium solution and the mixture was heated at 80 C for another 16 h.
The desired product 3k was observed and emerged in recent years, spurred intense development in this arena.
Among the various direct C–H bond functionalization examples, chelation-assisted sp (aryl) and sp C–H bonds acti- isolated in 53% yield.
(Scheme 1) Inspired by the observed results, our efforts were focused on the optimization of the reaction conditions and developing an efficient catalytic system for olefination of enamide.
To this end, the reaction of N-(3H-inden-1-yl) enamide 1a and tert-butyl acrylate (2a) was screened under various reaction conditions using different palladium catalysts and oxidants.
The results are shown in Table 1.
When the reaction was carried out under the previously reported conditions, the desired product was obtained in 50% yield (Table 1, entry 1).
The reaction cannot proceed in DMSO solvent, wherein the starting material was recovered after 24 h (Table 1, entry 2).
It was found that using acetic acid alone as solvent, with 10 mol% of palladium( ) acetate as catalyst, oxygen as the sole oxidant and with 1 equivalent of sodium acetate as additive under 80 C, the desired product can be obtained in 80% yield (Table 1, entry 3).
However, decreasing the catalyst loading to 5 mol% will lower the yield dramatically (Table 1, entry 4), while increasing the amount of NaOAc has no significant effect (Table 1, entry 5).
Other palladium catalysts were also investigated in this reaction and Pd(TFA)2, PdCl2, Pd (CH3)2Cl2 and Pd(PhCN)2Cl2 were all found to give the product in moderate yields (Table 1, entries 6, 8, 9 and 10); but no desired product was formed when Pd(PPh3)2Cl2 was used as catalyst (Table 1, entry 7).
We also observed that only 37% yield was achieved when the ratio of 1a and 2a was changed to 1 : 4, while no desired product was obtained in the absence of palladium catalyst.
The absence of oxygen as the oxidant resulted in the rapid decomposition of the substrate and therefore trace amount of product formation (Table 1, entry 12).
In addition to tert-butyl acrylate, different electron-deficient coupling partners were tested in this cross-coupling reaction using 10 mol% loading of Pd(OAc)2.
methyl acrylate, ethyl acrylate, n-butyl acrylate and phenyl acrylate all furnished the desired product in high yields.
As for acrylonitrile, only 12% yield was obtained, while styrene afforded the corresponding desired product in 55% yield.
Therefore tert-butyl acrylate was the best coupling partner in our system.
Substrate scope Next, a variety of enamide derivatives were screened with tertbutyl acrylate using 10 mol% Pd(OAc)2 catalyst.
The results are shown in Table 2.
It can be seen that both cyclic enamides (Table 2, 3a–3i) and acyclic enamides (Table 2, 3j, 3k) can all generate the products in moderate to high yields.
The effect of the substituents on the benzene ring was not obvious; an electrondonating group was well-tolerated (Table 2, 3c), while moderately electron-withdrawing groups slightly decreased the product yield (Table 2, 3g–3i).
The presence of methyl group on the acyclic ring diminished the yield in acetic acid solvent (Table 2, 3b, 3h).
Notably, halide substituents were tolerated, which is very useful for further transformation (Table 2, 3g–3i).
The choice of solvent was found to be crucial for the success of this coupling reaction.
For indanone- and tetralone-derived enamides, the desired products can be obtained in acetic acid solvent (Table 2, 3a–3e).
On the other hand, 4-chromanone-derived enamide 1f completely decomposed in acetic acid, while a high yield of 76% can be achieved in DMSO.
Substrates 1g and 1h can furnish the desired product in moderate yields either in acetic acid or in DMSO.
Acyclic substrates were only compatible in DMSO, providing the corresponding products in moderate yields (Table 2, 3j, 3k).
Proposed mechanism Based on the X-ray structure, a plausible mechanism is proposed in Scheme 2.
The alkenyl C–H bond of enamide 1 is firstly activated by the Pd( ) complex to form the six-membered palladacycle intermediate 2 (a possible s –C(sp )–Pd intermediate 2 0 cannot be ruled out in this step).
Next, coordination of the acrylate to Pd followed by migratory insertion gives intermediate 5.
The desired product 6 is finally obtained after b -hydride elimination.
The Pd(0) that was generated is then recycled back to Pd by the oxidant.
In summary, a mechanism of direct coupling reaction between enamide and acrylate was well-studied by H NMR spectroscopy and X-ray analysis.
A vinylpalladium cyclic complex was isolated and proved to be the possible coupling intermediate with acrylate.
We also have developed the first successful catalytic olefination reaction of enamides with electron-poor alkenes catalyzed by Pd(OAc)2 and 1 atm oxygen as sole oxidant.
The corresponding products were obtained in moderate to high yields and with excellent regioselectivities.
The use of oxygen as sole oxidant makes the method potentially appealing for the chemical industry in view of its environmental and economical advantages.
This novel method produces highly functionalized, versatile compounds which can be converted to a wide variety of building blocks and complex molecules.
Work along this line and detailed mechanistic studies are in progress.
We gratefully acknowledge the Nanyang Technological University and Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 2 (No.T207B1220RS) for the funding of this research.
We thank Prof. K. Narasaka for his helpful discussions.
